## WEEK I - Introduction to Cryptography

>[ðŸ  MENU - 6CCS3CIS](year3/6ccs3cis.md)
>
>â¹ï¸
>
>[âž¡ï¸ WEEK II - Formal Cryptographic Scheme](year3/6ccs3cis/w2.md)
>
>Outlines:
>
>1. Cryptorgraphic concepts
>     - Terminologies
>2. Principles of Cryptography
>     - Security
>     - Integrity
>3. Approaches
>     - MAC
>     - SKE

### 1.1. Cryptorgraphic concepts

##### 1.1.1. History of Cryptography*

- Pre-modern approaches
  - Motivation - Guarantee the security of information in communication process. 
  - Examples
    > Ancient Rome
    >
    > Medival
    >
    > Teleport
    >
    > WWI and WWI
- Modern Cryptography
  - Claude Shannon - using probabilitic theory to define the property of security for ciphers
    - Makes the Cryptography become a scientific subject. 
    - Distinguish the classic cipher and modern cipher. 

##### 1.1.2. Terminologies and Concepts

- Terminologies

  - *Plaintext* - $m \in M$, $M$ denotes the plaintext space
  - *Ciphertext* - $c \in C$, $C$ denotes the cipertext space
  - *Secret key* - $k \in K$, $K$ denotes the secret key space
    - Secret key is the key factor to guarantee the security of the encryption systems. 
    - We want to guarantee the securcy even the attacker knows all the details for the mechanism of the cryptosystem, if the secret key is not leaked. 
  - Encrypt - Function $E$
  - Decrypt - Function $D$

- Relationship

  - Plaintext with a secret key can be encrypted into a cipertext: $c = E(k, m)$
  - Cipertext with a secret key can be decrypted into a plaintext: $m = D(k, c)$

  > e.g.
  >
  > Assume a symmetric key encryption diagram, i.e., the encryption and decryption use the same secret key, then, 
  >
  > $(E, D)$ is a symmetric-key encryption algorithm defines at $(K, M, C)$, where $\forall m \in M, \forall k \in K, m = D(k, E(k, m))$. 

---

### 1.2. Principles of Cryptography

##### 1.2.1. Securcy

- Motivation

  - Others shouldn't be able to infer meaningful information about *plaintext(s)* by observing *ciphertext(s)*. 

- Perfect Secrecy (By Channon)

  - If $m_0, m_1 \in M (|m_0| = |m_1|)$ and $\forall c \in C$, 
    - we have that $P[E(k, m_0) = c] = P[E(k, m_1) = c]$, then we said that the system $(E, D)$ has the property of perfect secrecy. 
    - $P$ denotes the probability. 
    - Secret key $k \in K$ is random. 
  - i.e., Attacker cannot know the content of plaintext through the ciphertext. 

- Channon's Theorm*

  - The length of *secret key* should greater or equal to the length of *plaintext*.

  - Assume $(E, D)$ is a symmetric-key encryption algorithm defines at $(K, M, C)$, if the algorithm is perfect secret, then $|K| \geq |M|$

    ***Proof.***
    
    > 1. Assume $|K| < |M| \implies$
    >2. There exist a ciphertext $c$  and two plaintexts $m_0, m_1$, such that $P[E(k, m_0) = c] \neq P[E(k, m_1) = c] \implies$
    > 3. $(E, D)$ is not perfect secret. Since there is a contradiction, thus the assumption is not true. 
    > 4. Q.E.D. 

- Semantics Secrecy

- Stream Cipher*

  - Using a pseudo-random generator (PRG) to extend a short secret key into a long secret key

    > Assume $G$ is a high-effective deterministic function, where
    >
    > $G: \{0, 1\}^s \rightarrow \{0, 1\}^n, s << n$, then $G$ is a PRG. 

  - Using the *long secret key* to **XOR** with the *plaintext* by bite to get the *ciphertext*, vice versa. 

    > Assume $(E, D)$ is a stream cipher defined at $(K, M, C)$, then
    >
    > $E(k, m): G(k) \bigoplus m = c$
    >
    > $D(k, c): G(k) \bigoplus c = m$
    >
    > Where $G: \{0, 1\}^s \rightarrow \{0, 1\}^n, K=\{0, 1\}^s, M=\{0, 1\}^n$

##### 1.2.2. Integrity

- Motivation
  - We don't want the ciphertexts could be changed by others and get nonsense decrypted messages. 
  - Secrecy and integrity are distinct security properties. 
- Methods
  - Create a cryptographic *tag* that depends on the ciphertext and another shared secret *integrity key*. 
  - Send the *ciphertexts* with the *tag* together in the message. 
  - Check the *tag* first. Only decrypting after validating the correctness of tag. 
- Expection
  - Preventing reordering *ciphertexts* and *tags*,
  - Preventing repeated *ciphertexts* and *tags*,
  - Preventing changing the direction of delivery of *ciphertexts* and *tags*.

---

### 1.3. Approaches

##### 1.3.1. Message Authentication Code (MAC)

- Definition
  - A triple of algorithm $\text{MAC} = (\text{KGen, Tag}, V_f)$ where 
    - The algorithm $\text{KGen}$ outputs an integrity key $ik$, a uniformly random bitstring of some length,
    - On input an integrity key $ik$ and a message $m$, the algorithm $\text{Tag}(ik, m)$ outputs a tag $\tau$. 
    - On input an integrity key $ik$, a message $m$ and a tag $\tau$ the verification algorithm $V_f(ik, m, \tau)$ outputs either $0$ or $1$. 
  - Used to guarantee the **integrity** of the message. 
- Correctness of MAC
  - For all $m \in \mathcal{M}$ and $ik \in \mathcal{K}$ we have $V_f(ik, m, \text{Tag}(ik, m)) = 1$.
  - i.e., A correctly generated tag $\tau$, basing on the correct key $ik$ and message $m$, can be verified. 

##### 1.3.2. Secret Key Encryption Scheme (SKE)

- Definition
  - A Triple of algorithm $\text{SKE} = \text{(KGen, Enc, Dec)}$, where 
    - The algorithm $\text{KGen}$ outputs a secret key $sk$, a uniformly randombitstring of some length,
    - On input a secret key $sk$ and a message $m$, the algorithm $\text{Enc}(sk, m)$ outputs a ciphertext $c$,
    - On input a secret key $sk$ and a ciphertext $c$,  the algorithm $\text{Dec}(sk, c)$ outputs a plaintext $m$. 
  - Used to guarantee the **Securcy** of the message. 
- Correctness of SKE
  - For all $m \in \mathcal{M}, sk \in \mathcal{K}$, we have $\text{Dec}(sk, \text{Enc}(sk, m)) = m$.
