## WEEK VII - Public-Key Encryption

>[ðŸ  MENU - 6CCS3CIS](year3/6ccs3cis.md)
>
>[â¬…ï¸ WEEK VI - Introduction to Number Theory](year3/6ccs3cis/w6.md)
>
>[âž¡ï¸ WEEK VIII - Digital Signatures](year3/6ccs3cis/w8.md)
>
>Outlines:
>
>1. 

### 7.1. One-Way Function

##### 7.1.1. One-Way Function

- Motivation
  - Consider the general cryptographic schema.
    - Types
      - Symmetric algorithms.
      - Asymmetric (or public key) algorithms. 
    - Encryption and decryption should be easy, if keys are known.
    - Security depends only on secrecy of the key, not on the algorithm.
- Definition
  - A funciton $f: X \to Y$ is a one-way function if it is *easy* to compute $f(x)$ for all $x \in X$, but given only $y \in Y$ it is hard or infeasible to compute $x \in X$ so that $f(x) = y$.

  - Easy

    - Generally, defined to mean a problem that can be solved in polynomial time as a function of input length. 

      > i.e.,  If input length is $n$ bits, then time to compute function is proportional to $n^a$, where $a$ is a fixed constant. Denote it as $\text{poly}(n)$.

  - Hard

    - Effort to solve problem grows faster than polynomial time as a function of input size.

      > e.g.
      >
      > Time to invert the function proportional to $2^n$ for input length $n$ bits.

- Example

  > e.g.
  >
  > Square root
  >
  > If you know $x=512$, then $f(x)= x^2 = 512^2 = 262144$ is easy to compute.
  >
  > If you know $f(x) = 262144$, then $x = \sqrt{x^2} = \sqrt{262144}$ is hard to compute. 

- One-way Function in Cryptography

  - Encryption is (very) easy whereas decryption is (very) difficult.
  - The idea is: $f(x)$ acts as a public key and $x$ as a private key.

##### 7.1.2. Public-key Setting

- Public-key Encryption Scheme (PKE)

  - Definition

    A public-key encryption scheme with message space $\mathcal{M}$ and the ciphertext space $\mathcal{C}$ consists of a tuple of efficient algorithms $\text{PKE} = (\text{KGen}, \text{Enc}, \text{Dec})$, given as

    - $\text{KGen}(1^n)$: on input $1^n$ outputs a pair of keys $(pk, sk)$, 
    - $\text{Enc}(pk, m)$: on input of a public key $pk$, and a message $m \in \mathcal{M}$, outputs a ciphertext $c \in \mathcal{C}$, 
    - $\text{Dec}(sk, c)$ (Deterministic algorithm): on input of a secret key $sk$ and a ciphertext $c$ outputs message $m \in \mathcal{M}$. 

- Prefect Correctness

  - Motivation

    > If:
    >
    > a *public key* is used to encrypt a plaintext into a ciphertext,
    >
    > then:
    >
    > decryption of this *ciphertext* with the secret key returns the same plaintext. 

  - Definition

    - We say $\text{PKE}$ **satisfies (prefect) correctness** if $\forall n \in \mathbb{N}, (pk, sk) \leftarrow \text{KGen} (1^n)$ and $\forall m \in \mathcal{M}$ holds
      $$
      \Pr[\text{Dec}(sk, \text{Enc}(pk, m)) = m] = 1
      $$
      where the probability is taken over the random coins of $\text{KGen}$ and $\text{Enc}$. 

    - 




##### 7.1.3. 