## WEEK VIII - Digital Signatures

>[🏠 MENU - 6CCS3CIS](year3/6ccs3cis.md)
>
>[⬅️ WEEK VII - Public-Key Encryption](year3/6ccs3cis/w7.md)
>
>[➡️ WEEK IX - Zero-Knowledge Proofs](year3/6ccs3cis/w9.md)
>
>Outlines:
>
>1. Digital Signatures
>    - Introduction
>    - Signature scheme
>2. Textbook RSA Signatures
>    - Preliminaries
>    - RSA Parameter Generator
>    - Security of Textbook RSA
>    - RSA-FDH Signature
>3. Cryptographic Hashes
>    - Introduction
>    - Construct Hash Functions
>    - Collision Resistance
>4. Public Key Infrastructure
>    - PKI

### 8.1. Digital Signatures

##### 8.1.1. Introduction to Digital Signatures

- Definition

  - Signature scheme allows a signer $S$, who has established a public key $pk$, to **sign** a message $m$ using the associated secret key $sk$.
  - Anyone, who knows $pk$ can **verify** that the message came from $S$ and was not modified in transit. 

- Example

  > e.g.
  >
  > Software updates
  >
  > Software company releases an update. Any client should be able to verify that the update is authentic ($pk$ could be
  >
  > bundled with the original software). A malicious party should not be able to issue a fraudulent update!

- Digital Signatures vs. MACs

  - Digital signatures simplify key distribution and management, especially when the sender needs to communicate with multiple receiver.
  - Signatures are publicly verifiable, and thus transferable.
  - Non-repudiation; once signer $S$ signs a message, they cannot later deny having done so. Crucial for legal applications, e.g. certification.

##### 8.1.2. Signature scheme

- Definition

  - A signature scheme $\text{SIG}$ with message space $M$ and signature space $S$ consists of a tuple of efficient algorithms $(\text{KGen, Sign}, V_f)$ given as

    - $\text{KGen}(1^n)$: On input $1^n$ outputs a pair of public/secret keys ($pk, sk$), 
    - $\text{Sign}(sk, m)$: On input of a secret key $sk$ and message $m \in \mathcal{M}$, it outputs a signature $\sigma \in \mathcal{S}$,
    - $V_f(pk, m, \sigma)$ (deterministic algorithm): on input of a public key $pk$, message $m \in \mathcal{M}$ and a signature $\sigma \in \mathcal{S}$, outputs a bit, with $b=1$ meaning valid and $b=0$ meaning invalid. 

  - Correctness

    > If a *secret key* is used to sign a message into a *signature*, then
    >
    > verifying the signature with the public key returns $b = 1$, i.e. valid.

    - We say $SIG = (\text{KGen, Sign, }V_f)$ satisfies (perfect) correctness if $\forall n \in \mathbb{N}$, $(pk, sk) \leftarrow \text{KGen}(1^n)$ and $\forall m \in \mathcal{M}$ it holds:
      $$
      \Pr[V_f(pk, m, \text{Sign}(sk, m)) = 1] = 1
      $$
      where the probability is taken over the random coins of $\text{KGen}$ and $\text{Sign}$.

- Security

  - Example

    > Software company releases $(m, \sigma)$ where $m$ is is the update and $\sigma = \text{Sign}(sk, m)$ is the signature.
    >
    > Any client should be able to verify that the update is authentic, i.e., $V_f (pk, m, \sigma) = 1$. 
    >
    > A malicious party could try to issue $(m',\sigma')$ where $m'$ was a fraudulent update that was never released by the company.
    >
    > - $m'$ could be a (even slightly) modified version of a some previous update. 
    > - $m'$ could be completely new and unrelated. 
    >
    > For security, we want to make sure no such malicious party can come up with a valid signature $\sigma'$ for $m'$. 

  - Intuition

    - Adversaries given the oracle $\text{Sign}(sk, \cdot)$ cannot forge a *signature* on a message they do not know a *signature* for. 
      - Let $(pk, sk) \leftarrow \text{KGen}(1^n)$ and $Q = \empty$, 
      - Each time $\mathcal{A}$ with $\text{Sign}(sk, \cdot)$ queries $\sigma \leftarrow \text{Sign}(sk, m)$, add $m$ to $Q$. 
      - $\mathcal{A}$ with $\text{Sign}(sk, \cdot)$ outputs $(m^*, \sigma^*)$. 
      - $\mathcal{A}$ wins if $V_f(pk,m^∗,\sigma^∗) = 1$ and $m^* \notin Q$.
    - If no adversaries win with probability (meaningfully) more than zero then *SIG is secure*.

    - In the literature, it’s called existential unforgeability under <u>chosen-message attack (EUF-CMA)</u>.

  - EUF-CMA security
    $$
    \begin{array}{ll}
    \underline{\text{Exp}^{\text{euf-cma}}_{\mathcal{A}, SIG} (n):} \\
    Q = \empty \\
    (pk, sk) \leftarrow \text{KGen}(1^n) \\
    (m^*, \sigma^*) \leftarrow \mathcal{A}^{O_\text{Sign}(\cdot)}(1^n, pk) \\
    \texttt{if } V_f(pk, m^*, \sigma^*) = 1 \texttt{ and } m^* \notin Q \texttt{ return }1 \\
    \texttt{else return }0
    \end{array}
    $$

    $$
    \begin{array}{ll}
    \underline{O^\text{Sign} (m):} \\
    \sigma \leftarrow \text{Sign}(sk, m) \\
    Q = Q \cup \{m\} \\
    \texttt{return } \sigma \\
    \end{array}
    $$

    - Definition

      > The difference from MAC security is small. This is because (in both MAC and signatures) the oracle holds a secret key.

      - We say that $SIG = (\text{KGen, Sign, }V_f)$ is **(EUF-CMA) secure** if for all efficient adversaries $\mathcal{A}$, there exists a negligible function $negl: \mathbb{N} \to \mathbb{R}_{\geq 0}$ such that
        $$
        \Pr[\text{Exp}^{\text{euf-cma}}_{\mathcal{A}, SIG} (n) = 1] \leq negl(n)
        $$
        for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$, where $\text{Exp}^{\text{euf-cma}}_{\mathcal{A}, SIG} (n)$ is defined as above. 

      - Essentially, $\mathcal{A}$ can NOT win the security game with probability meaningfully larger than 0.

---

### 8.2. Textbook RSA Signature

##### 8.2.1. Preliminaries

- Modulus parameter generator (7.2.1.)
- RSA parameter generator (7.2.2.)

- Observation:

  - By Euler'sTheorem, we have $(m^d)^e = m^{ed} = m (\mod N)$ for $m \in \mathbb{Z}^∗_N$.
    So, we can pick $σ = [m^d \mod N]$ be the signature of $m$.

##### 8.2.2. RSA parameter generator

- Definition

  - $\text{KGen}(1^n)$: Set $(N, e, d) \leftarrow \text{GenRSA}(1^n)$ and output pair of public and secret keys as $pk := (N,e), sk := (N, d)$. 
  - $\text{Sign}(sk, m)$: Takes as input the secret key, $sk = (N, d)$, and a message $m \in \mathbb{Z}^*_N$ and outputs $\sigma := [m^d \mod N]$.
  - $V_f(pk, m, \sigma)$: Takes as input the public key $pk = (N, e)$, message $m$ and a signature $\sigma \in \mathbb{Z}^*_N$, and it checks whether
    $$
    m \overset{?}= [\sigma^e \mod N]
    $$
    If so, it outputs 1 and 0 otherwise. 

- Correctness

  - We want to prove that for any message $m \in \mathbb{Z}_N^*, V_f(pk, m, \text{Sign}(sk, m)) = 1$.
    - Recall that $pk := (N,e), sk := (N, d)$. Let $k \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $k \cdot \phi(N) + 1 = ed$.
    - The signature $\sigma \leftarrow \text{Sign}(sk, m)$ is equal to $\sigma = [m^d \mod N]$. 
    - Hence, $V_f(pk, m, \sigma = \text{Sign}(sk, m))$ checks wheter
      $$
      \begin{array}{lll}
      [\sigma^e \mod N] &= &[[m^d \mod N]^e \mod N] \\
      ~ &= &[m^{ed} \mod N] \\
      ~ &= &[m^{k \phi(N) + 1} \mod N] \\
      ~ &= &[(m^{k \phi(N)})^k \cdot m \mod N] \\
      ~ &= &[(1)^k \cdot m \mod N] \\
      ~ &= &[m \mod N] \\
      ~ &= &m
      \end{array}
      $$

      > e.g.
      >
      > Let $p = 7,q = 5, e = 13$. Compute a signature on message $m = 2$.
      >
      > >We have $N=pq=35, \phi(N)=(p−1)(q−1)=24$, 
      > >
      > >$d = [e^{-1} \mod 24] = 13$ (since $13 \cdot 13 = 1 (\mod 24)$). The public key is then given as $pk = (35, 13)$ and the private key is $sk = (35, 13)$. 
      > >
      > >We compute a signature on $m = 2$ as follows
      > >$$
      > >m^d = 2^{13} = (2^5)^2 \cdot 2^3 = 32^2 \cdot 8 = (-3)^2 \cdot 8 = 72 = 2 (\mod 35)
      > >$$
      > >Hence, the signature on $m=2$ is $\sigma = [m^d \mod N] = 2$. 


##### 8.2.3. Security of Textbook RSA

- Definition

  > $\text{KGen}(1^n)$: Sets $(N, e, d) \leftarrow \text{GenRSA}(1^n)$ and output pair of public and secret keys as $pk:=(N, e), sk:=(N,d)$. 
  > $V_f(pk, m, \sigma)$: Takes as input the public key $pk := (N, e)$, message $m$ and a signature $\sigma \in \mathbb{Z}^*_N$, and it checks whether
  > $$
  > m \overset{?}= [\sigma^e \mod N]
  > $$
  > If so, it outputs 1 and 0 otherwise. 
  > 
  
- Evaluation

  - We can come up with valid signatures without knowing the secret key $sk$. Since
    - Pick any $\sigma \in \mathbb{Z}^*_N$ and compute $m = [\sigma^e \mod N]$. Then, $(m, \sigma)$ is a valid message/signature pair. 
  - Textbook RSA is NOT (EUF-CMA) secure:
    - Adversary $\mathcal{A}$ can ignore the oracle access $O_\text{Sign}(\cdot)$ and just pick any $\sigma^* \in \mathbb{Z}^∗_N$ and compute $m^∗ = [\sigma^{∗e} \mod N]$. 
    - Then, $(m^∗, \sigma^∗)$ is a valid message/signature pair and $m^* \notin Q$.
- Example
  - Forging a signature on an arbitrary message:
    > e.g.
    > Suppose the adversary $\mathcal{A}$ wants to forge a signature on $m \in \mathbb{Z}_N^*$ of its choice. 
    > The adversary picks distinct $m_1, m_2$ such that $m_1, m_2 = m (\mod N)$. It then obtains two signatures $\sigma_1, \sigma_2$ on $m_1, m_2$ respectively:
    > $$
    > m_1 = [\sigma^e_1 \mod N] \\
    > m_2 = [\sigma^e_2 \mod N] 
    > $$
    > By multiplying both sides we get
    > $$
    > m = m_1 m_2 = [\sigma^e_1 \mod N] \cdot [\sigma^e_2 \mod N] = (\sigma_1 \sigma_2)^e (\mod N)
    > $$
    > Hence, $\sigma := [(\sigma_1, \sigma_2) \mod N]$ is a valid signature on $m$. 
    >

##### 8.2.4. RSA-FDH signature

- Motivation

  - Fix the security of Textbook RSA (from 8.2.2.)
    - One should not be able to maliciously pick a possible signature $\sigma$ and then find a corresponding message $m$.
    - We should also eliminate the *homomorphic* property of textbook RSA. 

- Process

  - Introduce a function $H: \{0, 1\}^* \to \mathbb{Z}_N^*$. A signature $\sigma$ on $m$ now be the textbook RSA signature on $H(m)$.
    > - $\text{KGen}(1^n)$: Sets $(N, e, d) \leftarrow \text{GenRSA}(1^n)$ and output pair of public and secret keys as $pk:=(N, e), sk:=(N,d)$.
    > - $\text{Sign}(sk, m)$: Takes as input the secret key, $sk = (N, d)$, and a message $m \in \mathbb{Z}^*_N$ and outputs $\sigma := [H(m)^d \mod N]$.
    > - $V_f(pk, m, \sigma)$: Takes as input the public key $pk = (N, e)$, message $m$ and a signature $\sigma \in \mathbb{Z}^*_N$, and output 1 if and only if $H(m) = [\sigma^e \mod N]$.

    > It should be hard to find two different $m_1, m_2$ for which $H(m_1) = H(m_2)$.
    >
    > Otherwise, a signature $\sigma$ for $m_1$ (which satisfies $H(m_1) = [\sigma^e \mod N]$) is also a valid signature for $m_2$ (since $H(m_2) = H(m_1) = [\sigma^e \mod N])$.

  - *Correctness* holds the same way as for textbook RSA. 

---

### 8.3. Cryptographic Hashes

##### 8.3.1. Introduction to Cryptographic Hashes

- Motivation
  - How to pick the function $H$?
  - We can introduce a hash function $H(x)$, which (in the general sense) has the properties:
    1. Compression that $H$ maps an input $x$ of arbitrary bit length to an output $H(x)$ of fixed bit length $n$.
    2. Polynomial time computable.
- $H(x)$ is a cryptographic hash function if it is additionally
  - **One-way** (or pre-image resistant). Given $y$, it is hard to compute an x where $H(x) = y$.
  - And usually either
    - **2nd-preimage resistance**: It is computationally infeasible to find a second input that has the same output as any specified input, i.e., given $x$ to find a second $x' \neq x$ such that $H(x) = H(x')$.
    - **Collision resistance**: It is difficult to find two distinct inputs $x, x'$ where $H(x) = H(x')$. 
- Applications of hash functions
  - Password hashing
    - For password $p$, store $H(p)$ in password file (otherwise an adversary, who steals the laptop, could retrieve the password in the clear).
  - Virus fingerprinting
    - We want to check whether the suspicious file is in a database of previously identified viruses.
    - It suffices to compare the hash $H(\text{file})$ to the hashes of known viruses.
  - Deduplication
    - Eliminate duplicate data, esp. in the context of cloud storage.
    - Upload a new file with $H(\text{file})$. Then, the cloud provider can quickly check whether the incoming file was already there - then simply add a pointer to the existing file.
  - Peer-to-peer file sharing
    - Servers store different files and advertise the files they hold by broadcasting the hashes of those files. The hashes allow clients to find out which servers host a particular file.

##### 8.3.2. Constructing a cryptographic hash function

- Simplest constructions use block chaining techniques (Rabin 1978):

  - Divide message $M$ into fixed size blocks $b_1, . . ., b_n$.
  - Use symmetric encryption algorithm. 
  - Similar to Cipher Block Chaining, but no secret key.

- Davies-Meyer construction

  - Given a block cipher $F: \{0, 1\}^n \times \{0, 1\}^l \to \{0, 1\}^l$, here is a simple way to construct a hash function: $H: \{0, 1\}^{l + n} \to \{0, 1\}^l$:
    $$
    H(k \parallel x) := F_k(x) ⊕ x
    $$

  - Many hash functions used in practice <u>apply the Davies-Meyer construction</u>, but block ciphers dedicated for this application are used (rather than block ciphers designed for encryption, like DES or AES).

    > e.g.
    >
    > MD5,
    >
    > SHA-0, SHA-1, SHA-2, etc. 

##### 8.3.3. Collision resistance and the birthday paradox

- Birthday paradox
  
  > Assume birthdays (intended as day and month, not year) are uniformly and independently distributed among the 365 days of a non-leap year.
  >
  > If $k$ people are in a room, what is the probability that some two of them share a birthday? Is it simply $\approx k/365$?
  >
  > > Using probability theory, one can show that for $k = 23 (\approx \sqrt{365})$ the probability is roughly 51%. 
  
  - Birthday Attack
    - Pick uniformly random $x_1, . . . , x_k$. Check $H(x_1), H(x_2), ..., H(x_k)$ and whether we obtained a collision. 
    - Generalization: Let $H$ have $2^n$ possible outputs. When $H$ is be applied to $k = 2^{n/2}$ inputs, then the probability of a collision is greater than 1/2. 
    - To be collision-resistant against adversaries running in time $2^l$, length of the output must be $≥ 2^l$ (<u>necessary condition, not a sufficient one!</u> ).
  
- RSA-FDH (Full Domain Hash)

  - Let $H : {0, 1}^∗ → \mathbb{Z}^∗_N$ be a hash function. 
  
    - $\text{KGen}(1^n)$: Sets $(N, e, d) \leftarrow \text{GenRSA}(1^n)$ and output pair of public and secret keys as $pk := (N, e), sk := (N, d)$.
    - $\text{Sign}(sk, m)$: Takes as input the secret key, $sk = (N, d)$, and a message $m \in \mathbb{Z}^*_N$ and outputs $\sigma := [H(m)^d \mod N]$.
    - $V_f(pk, m, \sigma)$: Takes as input the public key $pk = (N, e)$, message $m$ and a signature $\sigma \in \mathbb{Z}^*_N$, and output 1 if and only if $H(m) = [\sigma^e \mod N]$.
  
    > No EUF-CMA security proof for any concrete instantiation of $H$.
  
  - There is a proof that RSA-FDH is EUF-CMA secure under the RSA assumption when $H$ is an ideal random function.

---

### 8.4. Public Key Infrastructure

##### 8.4.1. Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)

- Motivation
  - **Key management** refers to
    - the distribution of cryptographic keys,
    - the mechanisms used to bind an identity to a key,
    - the generation, maintenance and revoking of such keys.
  - We have seen protocols for authentication and key generation and distribution/exchange (e.g. Diffie-Hellman), and we have seen digital signatures (RSA-FDH).
  - We now look at **public key infrastructures (PKI)**:
    - How it is possible to bind a public key to (a representation of) an identity?
    - How can we represent identity ("naming")?
- Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)
  - A PKI is an infrastructure that allows principals to recognize which public key belongs to whom (i.e. to bind public keys to principals).
  - To join the PKI, Alice
    - generates her own public/private key pair $(pk_A,sk_A)$,
    - takes her public key $pk_A$ to a certification authority (CA) that everybody trusts and says "I am Alice and $pk_A$ is my public key".
  - The CA verifies that Alice is who she says she is, and then signs a digital certificate that states
     “Key $pk_A$ belongs to Alice”.
- A Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol is used by your web browser every time you securely connect to a website using https.
  - The protocol combines the concepts we learnt so far: Diffie-Hellman key exchange, ceritificate authorities, secret-key encryption + MACs