## WEEK IX - Zero-Knowledge Proofs

>[ðŸ  MENU - 6CCS3CIS](year3/6ccs3cis.md)
>
>[â¬…ï¸ WEEK VIII - Digital Signatures](year3/6ccs3cis/w8.md)
>
>[âž¡ï¸ WEEK X - Post-Quantum Cryptography](year3/6ccs3cis/w10.md)
>
>Outlines:
>
>1. Introduction to Zero-Knowledge Proofs
>1. Identification Schemes
>1. Fiat-Shamir ID Scheme
>1. Schnorr ID Scheme

### 9.1. Introduction to Zero-Knowledge Proofs

##### 9.1.1. Interactie Proof

- Proof

  > a fact or piece of information that shows that something exists or is true. 

- Interactie Proof

  - Definition
    - We say that $x$ is a *statement* and $w$ is a *witness*. $R(x,w) = 1$ means that $w$ is a valid witness for $x$ w.r.t. the relation $R$.
    - Prover and verifier communicate with each other, and at the end the verifier outputs 1 (accept), or 0 (reject).

  - Properties
    - **Correctness**: For an honest prover, the verifier always accepts.
    - **Soundness**: Any cheating prover, who does not know the witness w, cannot convince the verifier to accept with probability meaningfully more than zero.

- Example

  > e.g.
  >
  > Let $x$ be a mathematical statement that a teacher gave to students to prove (e.g. textbook RSA encryption is not IND-CPA secure).
  >
  > A student (prover) writes down a proof w and sends it to the teacher (verifier), who then checks validity of the proof (outputs 0/1).

- A generalisation of the complexity class NP. Indeed, the prover sends the witness $w$ in the clear, and the verifier efficiently checks whether $w$ belongs to the language $L = R(x)$.

  Notation: $R(x) = \{w : R(x, w) = 1\}$.

##### 9.1.2. Zero-Knowledge Proofs

- Definition

  - The verifier (or any eavesdropper) cannot learn any information about the witness $w$ from the interaction.
  - This is usually proven by showing that one can perfectly simulate honest transcripts without knowing the witness $w$.

- Application

  > building signature schemes soonTM
  >
  > electronic voting
  >
  > digital identity and e-wallet
  >
  > blockchain and cryptocurrencies
  >
  > UK DIATF

- Zero-knowledge proofs for specific relations $R$

  - There are various frameworks for zero-knowledge proofs, depending on the relation $R$.
    - General NP statements, circuit satisfiability problems. For example
    - Verifiable encryption - proving that a ciphertext c is a valid encryption of a message m and randomness $r$ under a public key $pk$. Here $x = (pk, c)$ and $w = (m, r)$. It is used to upgrade a CPA-secure encryption scheme to CCA-secure.
    - **Identification schemes**: used to build signature schemes.

---

### 9.2. Identification Schemes

##### 9.2.1. Introduction to Identification Schemes

- Definition
  - **ID scheme** is an interactive proof, where the prover wants to prove its identity, e.g. to authenticate themselves when logging in to a website.
  - The relation considered for identification schemes is of the following form:
    - $R(x, w) = 1 \iff w = sk$ is a valid corresponding secret key for the public key $x = pk$.
- Textbook RSA PKE relation
  - Let $x = (N,e)$ be the RSA public key. Then, $R(x,w) = 1$ if and only if $w = (N,d)$ where $e \cdot d = 1 (\mod N)$.
- El Gamal PKE relation
  - Let $x = (\mathbb{G},g,q,h)$ be the El Gamal public key. Then, $R(x,w) = 1$ if and only if $w = (\mathbb{G},g,q,x)$ where $g^x = h$.

##### 9.2.2. Three-round ID scheme

- Definition

  - An ID scheme is a tuple of polynomial-time algorithms $Î  = (\text{KGen}, P_1, P_2, V)$, where the latter two are deterministic.
  - Here $C_{pk}$ is the challenge space dependent on the public key $pk$.

- Correctness

  - We say the ID scheme $Î  = (\text{KGen}, P_1, P_2, \mathcal{V})$ satisfies (perfect) correctness if $\forall n \in \mathbb{N}, (pk, sk) \leftarrow \text{KGen}(1^n), (I, state) \leftarrow P_1(sk)$ and $c \leftarrow \mathcal{C}_{pk}$, it holds that
    $$
    \Pr[\mathcal{V}(pk, c, P_2(sk, state, c)) = I] = 1
    $$

- Security

  - Motivation
    - A cheating prover, who does NOT know the prover's secret key should be unable to fool the verifier into accepting.
    - This should hold even if the attacker is able to passively eavesdrop on multiple (honest) executions of the protocol.
  - Definition
    - Let $\text{Trans}_{sk}$ be an oracle that, when called without any input, runs an honest execution of the protocol and returns to the adversary the whole transcript $(I,c,z)$ of the interaction.
      - Let $(pk, sk) \leftarrow \text{KGen}(1^n)$
      - $\mathcal{A}$ is given $pk$ and oracle access to $\text{Trans}_{sk}$ (it can query how often as it wants),
      - At any point of the experiment, $\mathcal{A}$ outputs a message $I$. A uniformly random challenge $c \leftarrow \mathcal{C}_{pk}$ is chosen and given to $\mathcal{A}$, who responds with some $z$ ($\mathcal{A}$ can still query $\text{Trans}_{sk}$).
      - A wins if $\mathcal{V}(pk,c,z) = I$.
    - If no adversaries win with probability (meaningfully) more than zero then: <u>the ID scheme is secure</u>.

- $\epsilon$-Security

  > Why $\epsilon$-security but not 0-security (i.e. standard security)?
  >
  > Because some ID schemes are only $\epsilon$-security, for a fairly large $\epsilon$ (see the next section). Therefore, some amplification techniques are need to reduce the cheating probability Îµ to negligible.

  - Definition

    - Let $\epsilon : \mathbb{N} \to \mathbb{R}_{\geq 0}$. We say that the ID scheme $Î  = (\text{KGen},P_1,P_2,\mathcal{V})$ is $\epsilon$-secure if for all efficient adversaries $\mathcal{A}$, there exists a negligible function $negl: \mathbb{N} \to \mathbb{R}_{\geq 0}$ such that for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$: 
      $$
      \Pr[\text{Exp}^{ID}_{\mathcal{A}, Î }(n) = 1] \leq \epsilon(n) + negl(n)
      $$
      ...

  - Zero-knowledge is somewhat captured in this definition.

    - This is because we claim that the additional transcripts that the adversary asks, should not help to convince the verifier. 
    - In particular, they should not reveal any information about $sk$.

---

### 9.3. Fiat-Shamir ID Scheme

##### 9.3.1. SQR problem

- Definition

  - We consider a new computational problem called computing square roots (SQR). 

  - It says that, given a square $v = [s^2 \mod N]$, it is hard to find its square root $x$, i.e. $v=x^2 (\mod N)$ ($x$ does NOT need to be equal to $s$).

  - We say computing square roots is hard relative to $\text{GenMod}$, if for all polynomial-time adversaries $\mathcal{A}$ there exists a negligible function $negl: \mathbb{N} â†’ \mathbb{R}_{\geq 0}$, such that for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$:
    $$
    \Pr[\text{Exp}^{SQR}_{\text{GenMod}, \mathcal{A}}(n) = 1] \leq negl(n)
    $$

    > It can in fact be shown that this problem is as hard as factoring. 

##### 9.3.2. Fiat-Shamir ID scheme

- Definition

  - The Fiat-Shamir identification scheme focuses on the following key generation:

    - Let $(N, p, q) \leftarrow \text{GenMod}(1^n)$. Then, pick $s \leftarrow \mathbb{Z}^âˆ—_N$ and set $v = [s^2 \mod N]$. Then,
      $$
      pk = (N, v) \\
      sk = (N, s)
      $$

  - Security relies on the fact that given $(N,v)$ it is hard to find its square root modulo $N$ (SQR assumption).

- Correctness

  - we have
    $$
    z^2 = r^2 \cdot s^{2c} = I \cdot (s^2)^c = I \cdot v^c (\mod N)
    $$

  - Hence, by dividing both sides by $v^c$ we get
    $$
    z^2 \cdot v^{-c} = I (\mod N)
    $$

  - Example

    > e.g.
    >
    > Assume $N = 15, s = 7, v = 4$, 
    >
    > > Using the fact that $[4^{-1} \mod 15] = 4$ we have $z^2 \cdot v^{-c} = 8^2 \cdot 4^{-1} = 8^2 \cdot 4 =2^8 (\mod 15)$
    > >
    > > Finally, from Euler's Theorem for $N=15$, we get that $2^8 = 1 (\mod 15)$ which is equal to $I=1 \mod 15$

- Security

  - A malicious prover can convince the verifier with probability 1/2 as follows. The attacker hopes that $c=0$ and sends $I = [z^2 \mod N]$ for $z \leftarrow \mathbb{Z}^*_N$.

  - Given a challenge $c$, if $c=0$ then  the attacker outputs $z$ generated earlier. Then
    $$
    z^2 \cdot v^{âˆ’c} = z^2 \cdot v^{âˆ’0} = z^2= I (\mod N)
    $$
    and thus the verifier accepts.

  - If computing square roots is hard relative to $\text{GenMod}$ then the Fiat-Shamir ID scheme $Î $ is 1/2-secure.

    - The proof sketch *(non-examinable)* consists of <u>two important observations</u>:
      1. transcripts can be perfectly simulated without knowing the secret key.
      2. given two transcripts $(I , c_0, z_0), (I , c_1, z_1)$ with the same first message $I$ , but two distinct challenges $c_0 \neq c_1$, one can efficiently extract the secret $sk$ (or in other words, compute the square root).

##### 9.3.3. Improvements and Extensions

- Fiat-Shamir ID scheme has only security 1/2, it is still possible to cheat with high probability. 
  - We can reduce the cheating probability by repeating this experiment $t = O(n)$ times in parallel.
  - For $t = 128$, the cheating probability becomes $2^{âˆ’128}$, but the communication becomes costly.
  - Feige-Fiat-Shamir protocol: 
    - for proving multiple statements $v_i = [s_i^2 \mod N]$ for $i = 1, 2, ..., k$. 
- Work Over $\mathbb{Z}^*_N$
  - We required $s, r \in \mathbb{Z}^*_N$. 
  - They cannot simply be chosen uniformly at random from $\mathbb{Z}_N = \{0, 1, ...,N - 1\}$. 
  - Since $v$ may not be invertible modulo $N$, especially if $s \notin \mathbb{Z}^*_N$. 
  - But then we can modify the verification check as $I \cdot v^c = z^2 (\mod N)$

- Fiat-Shamir ID scheme for any $s \in \mathbb{Z}_N$
  - Correctness: we have
    $$
    z^2 = r^2 \cdot s^{2c} = I \cdot (s^2)^c = I \cdot v^c (\mod N)
    $$
  - Security
    - Security can be shown similarly as in Basic Fiat-Shamir ID scheme security. 
      $$
      \frac{N - \phi(N)}{N} = \frac{pq - (p-1)(q-1)}{pq} = \frac{p + q - 1}{pq} = \frac{p + q - 1}{pq} \leq \frac{1}{p} + \frac{1}{q} \approx \frac{1}{2^{n-1}}
      $$
  
    - Observation
      - Transcripts can be perfectly simulated without knowing $sk$.
        - An attacker for the security game cannot distinguish whether it interacts with $\text{Trans}_sk(\cdot) or \text{Trans}^âˆ—(\cdot)$. 
      - Given two transcripts $(I,c_0,z_0), (I,c_1,z_1)$ with the same first message, but two distinct challenges $c_0 \neq c_1$. 
        - Since the challenge space is only $\{0, 1\}$, we must have $\{c_0, c_1\}= \{0, 1\}$, and $c_0 - c_1 =1$. 
        - From the verification equation we have $I =[z_0^2 Â·v^{âˆ’c_0} \mod N]$ and $I =[z_1^2 Â·v^{âˆ’c_1} \mod N]$
        - In particular, we have $z^2_0 \cdot v^{-c_0} = z_1^2 \cdot v^{-c_1} (\mod N)$
        - By rearranging, we get $(z_0z_1^{-1})^2 = v^{c_0 - c_1} = v (\mod N)$
        - Therefore, $x = [z_0z_1^{âˆ’1} \mod N]$ is a square root of $v$ modulo $N$. 

---

### 9.4. Schnorr ID Scheme

##### 9.4.1. Schnorr ID scheme

- Definition

  - The Schnorr identification scheme focuses on the following key generation:

    - Let $\text{Gen}$ be a group generator algorithm and
      $(\mathbb{G}, g, q) \leftarrow \text{GenMod}(1^n)$. Then, pick $x \leftarrow \mathbb{Z}_q$ and set $h=g^x$. Then, 

    $$
    pk = (\mathbb{G}, g, q, h) \\
    sk = (\mathbb{G}, g, q, x)
    $$

  - Security relies on the discrete logarithm assumption (if $\mathbb{G} = âŸ¨gâŸ©$ is a cyclic group).

- Correctness
  $$
  g^z =g^r \cdot g^{cx} = I \cdot (g^x)^c = I\cdot h^c.
  $$
  Hence, by dividing both sides by $h^c$ we get $g^z \cdot h^{âˆ’c} = I$ which concludes the proof.

  - Example

    > e.g. 
    >
    > An execution of the Schnorr ID scheme for $\mathbb{G} = \mathbb{Z}^*_7, g=3, q=6$. 
    >
    > > Initial step: $h = [[[g \cdot g \mod 7] \cdot g \mod 7] \cdot g \mod 7] = [3^4 \mod 7] = [81 \mod 7] = 4$
    > >
    > > Prover to Verifier: $I =[g^5 \mod7]=[3^5 \mod 7]=[9\cdot 9\cdot 3 \mod7]=[2\cdot 2\cdot 3 \mod 7]=5$
    > >
    > > Verifier to Prover: send $c=2$ back.
    > >
    > > Prover to Verifier: $z = [r + cx \mod 6] = [5 + 2 \cdot 4 \mod] = [13 \mod 6] = 1$
    > >
    > > First, $g^z = [3^1 \mod 7] = 3$. Morever, $h^{-1} = [4^{-1} \mod 7] = 2$ since $4 \cdot 2 = 1 (\mod 7)$. Hence
    > > $$
    > > g^z \cdot h^c = 3 \cdot 2^c = 3 \cdot 2^2 = 5 = I
    > > $$

- Security

  - A **malicious** prover can convince the verifier with probability $1/q$ as follows. The attacker hopes that $c=0$ and sends $I=g^z$ for $z \leftarrow \mathbb{Z}^q$.

  - Given a challenge $c$, if $c = 0$ then the attacker outputs $z$ generated earlier. Then
    $$
    g^z \cdot h^{-c} = g^z \cdot h^{-0} = g^z = I
    $$

  - Suppose $\text{Gen}$ always outputs descriptions $(\mathbb{G},g,q)$ of prime order groups. If the discrete logarithm problem is hard relative to $\text{Gen}$ then the Schnorr ID scheme is $1/q$-secure.

    - Proof. 
    - To achieve 0-security, one picks $q = O(2^n)$.

##### 9.4.2. Fiat-Shamir transform

- Definition

  - It is a widely used (in practice) transform <u>from identification schemes to digital signatures</u>. 
  - Informally, it transforms an interactive proof into a **non-interactive** proof.
  - Interaction is removed by the prover simply computing $c = H(I)$ where $H: \{0, 1\}^* \to \mathcal{C}_{pk}$ is a hash function. 

- Construction

  - Let $(\text{KGen}_{id}, P_1, P_2, \mathcal{V})$ be an identification scheme, and construct a signature scheme as follows:
    - $\text{KGen}$: On input $1^n$, run $(pk, sk) \leftarrow \text{KGen}_{id}$. The public key $pk$ determines the challenge space $\mathcal{C}_{pk}$. A function $H: \{0, 1\}^* \to \mathcal{C}_{pk}$ is specified but we leave this implicit.
    - $\text{Sign}$: On input a private key $sk$ and a message $m \in \{0, 1\}^*$, do the following:
      1. $(I, state) \leftarrow P_1(sk)$
      2. $c = H(I, m)$
      3. $z = P_2(sk, state, c)$
      Output the signature $\sigma = (c, z)$

    - $V_f$: On input a public key $pk$, a message $m$ and a signature $Ïƒ = (c, z)$, compute $I := \mathcal{V}(pk,c,z)$ and output 1 if and only if $H(I,m) = c$.

- Correctness

  - Let $(\text{KGen}_{id}, P_1, P_2, \mathcal{V})$ be a correct identification scheme. Then, the Fiat-Shamir transformed signature scheme from Construction above satisfies correctness.

- Security (Informal) 

  - Let $(\text{KGen}_{id}, P_1, P_2, \mathcal{V})$ be a secure (0-secure) identification scheme. Then, the Fiat-Shamir transformed signature scheme from Construction above satisfies **EUF-CMA security**, assuming $H$ is an "ideal random function".
  - It is obtained by applying the Fiat-Shamir transform on the Schnorr ID scheme.

- Example

  > e.g.
  >
  > Schnorr signature
  >
  > DSA and ECDSA
