## WEEK IV - Lexing

>[🏠 MENU - 6CCS3CFL](year3/6ccs3cfl.md)
>
>[⬅️ WEEK III - Automata & Regular Languages](year3/6ccs3cfl/w3.md)
>
>[➡️ WEEK V - Grammar & Parsing](year3/6ccs3cfl/w5.md)
>
>Outlines:
>
>1. Introduction to Lexing
>
>     - Motivation
>     - POSIX
>2. Sulzmann & Lu Lexer
>   - General Process
>    - Operations
>      - Flatten
>      - Mkeps
>      - Inject
>3. Simplification
>   - Simplification
>   - Rectification
>4. Lexer
>   - Lexing
>   - Records
>   - Environments
>   - Rules

### 4.1. Introduction to Lexing

##### 4.1.1. Motivation

- In programming languages, **lexer** is used to recognise the syntacal meaning of input data basing on the regular expression matcher, (i.e., tokenize the input strings), including the following types
  - operands, digits
  - identifiers
  - numbers (non-leading zeros) keywords
  - comments

- Example

  > e.g.
  >
  > ```scala
  > if true then then 42 else +
  > ```
  >
  > - KEYWORD:
  >   `if, then, else,`
  > - WHITESPACE: 
  >   `" ", \n,`
  > - IDENTIFIER:
  >   `LETTER · (LETTER + DIGIT + _)*`
  > - NUM:
  >  `(NONZERODIGIT · DIGIT*) + 0`
  > - OP:
  >   `+, ‐, *, %, <, <=`
  > - COMMENT:
  >  `/\* · ~(ALL\* · (\*/) · ALL\*) · \*/`
  >
  > Thus,
  > ```
  > KEYWORD(if),
  > IDENT(true),
  > KEYWORD(then),
  > KEYWORD(then),
  > NUM(42),
  > KEYWORD(else),
  > OP(+)
  > ```
  
- Problem of tokenizer

  - *Variable* cannot be identified correctly if they share a same prefix. 

    > e.g. 
    >
    > `x - 3`
    >
    > `(ab + a) · (c + bc)`

  - *Keywords* cannot be identified correctly if they followed by some combinations. 

    > e.g.
    >
    > Assume `if` is the key word, then `iffoo`


##### 4.1.2. POSIX: Two Rules

- Longest match rule / Maximal munch rule
  - The longest initial substring matched by any regular expression is taken as the next token.
- Rule priority
  - For a particular longest initial substring, the first regular expression that can match determines the token.

---

### 4.2. Sulzmann & Lu Lexer

##### 4.2.1. General Process

- Motivation

  - Sulzmann & Lu want to introduce values for regular expression about how it matches a string. Assume $r_n$ represents a regular expression, $v_n$ represents a corresponding values. 
  
  - We want to match the string `abc` using $r_1$:
    $$
    \begin{array}{lclclcl}
    r_1 &\overset{\text{der }a}\longrightarrow &r_2 &\overset{\text{der }b}\longrightarrow &r_3 &\overset{\text{der }c}\longrightarrow &r_4 \ \text{nullable?} \\
    \downarrow & ~ & \downarrow  & ~ & \downarrow  & ~ & \downarrow^\text{mkeps}\\
    v_1 &\underset{\text{inj }a}\longleftarrow &v_2 &\underset{\text{inj }b}\longleftarrow & v_3 &\underset{\text{inj }c}\longleftarrow &v_4
    \end{array}
    $$
    
    $$
    \begin{array}{llll}
    r_1: &a \cdot (b \cdot c) & v1: &\text{Seq(Char}(a), \text{Seq(Char}(b), \text{Char}(c))) \\
    r_2: &\textbf{1} \cdot (b \cdot c)  & v2: &\text{Seq(Empty, Seq(Char}(b), \text{Char}(c))) \\
    r_3: &(\textbf{0} \cdot (b \cdot c)) + (\textbf{1} + c) & v3: &\text{Right(Seq(Empty, Char}(c))) \\
    r_4: &(\textbf{0} \cdot (b \cdot c)) + ((\textbf{0} \cdot c) + \textbf{1}) & v4: &\text{Right(Right(Empty))}
    \end{array}
    $$
    
    
    1. We first build the three derivatives for the string by `der`. 
    2. Invoke `nullable` to find out whether the resulting regular expression can match the empty string.
    3. If yes, we call the function `mkeps` to see how the regular expression is matched with empty string.
    4. Calculate the value for how the derivative regular expression has matched a string. Invoke `inj` to reverse the values. 
  
- Regular expressions and their corresponding values
  $$
  \begin{array}{lcllcl}
  r &::= &\textbf{0}				&v &::= &~ \\
  ~		&| &\textbf{1}				&~ &~ & \text{Empty} \\
  ~		&| &c				&~ &| & \text{Char}(c) \\
  ~		&| &r_1 \cdot r_2		&~ &| & \text{Seq}(v_1, v_2) \\
  ~		&| &r_1 + r_2		&~ &| & \text{Left}(v) \\
  ~		&~ &~		&~ &| & \text{Right}(v) \\
  ~		&| &r^*			&~ &| & \text{Star}[] \\
  ~		&~ &~		&~ &| & \text{Star}[v_1, ..., v_n] \\
  \end{array}
  $$

  - There is no value for the regular expression $\textbf{0}$. Otherwise there is exactly one value corresponding to each regular expression.
  - The exception is $r_1 + r_2$ (`SEQ(r1, r2)`), where there are two values, namely $\text{Left}(v), \text{Right}(v)$ corresponding to the two alternatives. 
  - Note that $r^*$ is associated with a list of values, one of each copy of $r$ that was needed to match the string. Therefore we also need to return the empty list if no copy was for it. 


##### 4.2.2. Operations

- Flatten

  - This function obtains the string underlying a value. Denoted as `|_|`. 
  - Defined as follows
    $$
    \begin{array}{lll}
    |\text{Empty}| &\overset{def}= &[]\\
    |\text{Char}(c)| &\overset{def}= &[c]\\
    |\text{Left}(v)| &\overset{def}= &|v|\\
    |\text{Right}(v)| &\overset{def}= &|v|\\
    |\text{Seq}(v_1, v_2)| &\overset{def}= &|v_1| @ |v_2|\\
    |\text{Seq}[v_1, ..., v_n]| &\overset{def}= &|v_1| @ ... @ |v_n|\\
    \end{array}
    $$

- Mkeps

  - This function calculates a value for how a regular expression has matches the empty string. 

    i.e., Finding a (posix) value for recognising the empty string. 

  - Defined as follows: 
    $$
    \begin{array}{lll}
    \text{mkeps}(\textbf{1}) &\overset{def}= &\text{Empty} \\
    \text{mkeps}(r_1 + r_2) &\overset{def}= &\text{if nullable}(r_1) \\
    ~ &~ &\text{then Left(mkeps}(r_1)) \\
    ~ &~ &\text{else Right(mkeps}(r_2)) \\
    \text{mkeps}(r_1 \cdot r_2) &\overset{def}= &\text{Seq(mkeps}(r_1), \text{mkeps}(r_2)) \\
    \text{mkeps}(r^*) &\overset{def}= &\text{Stars}[]
    \end{array}
    $$

  - There are no cases for $\textbf{0}$ and $c$, since these regular expression cannot match the empty string.

- Inject

  - This function injects (adds) the character to a value, therefore to inverse the derivative operation. i.e., It rebuilds the value of the original regular expression according to the current character and current value. 
    
  - Defined as follows: 
    $$
    \begin{array}{lll}
    \text{inj }(c)\ c\ (\text{Empty}) &\overset{def}= &\text{Char }c \\
    \text{inj }(r_1 + r_2)\ c\ (\text{Left}(v)) &\overset{def}= &\text{Left(inj }r_1\ c\ v) \\
    \text{inj }(r_1 + r_2)\ c\ (\text{Right}(v)) &\overset{def}= &\text{Right(inj }r_2\ c\ v) \\
    \text{inj }(r_1 \cdot r_2)\ c\ (\text{Seq}(v_1, v_2)) &\overset{def}= &\text{Seq(inj }r_1\ c\ v_1, v_2) \\
    \text{inj }(r_1 \cdot r_2)\ c\ (\text{Left}(\text{Seq}(v_1, v_2))) &\overset{def}= &\text{Seq(inj }r_1\ c\ v_1, v_2) \\
    \text{inj }(r_1 \cdot r_2)\ c\ (\text{Right}(v)) &\overset{def}= &\text{Seq(mkeps}(r_1),\text{inj } r_2\ c\ v) \\
    \text{inj }(r^*)\ c\ (\text{Seq}(v, \text{Stars }v\ s)) &\overset{def}= &\text{Stars(inj }r\ c\ v :: vs)
    \end{array}
    $$

  - `inj` accepts the following args: 
  
    1. a regular expression, which we want to calculate the value, 
    2. a character that we want to inject, and
    3. a value that we will inject the character into. 
  
    and gives the result as a value. 

##### 4.2.4. Example: While Tokens

> e.g.
>
> $$
> \begin{array}{lll}
> \text{WHILE REGS} &\overset{def}= &((\texttt{"k": KEYWORD}) + \\
> ~ &~ &((\texttt{"i": ID}) + \\
> ~ &~ &((\texttt{"o": OP}) + \\
> ~ &~ &((\texttt{"n": NUM}) + \\
> ~ &~ &((\texttt{"s": SEMI}) + \\
> ~ &~ &((\texttt{"p": (LPAREN + PRAREN})) + \\
> ~ &~ &((\texttt{"b": (BEGIN + END)}) + \\
> ~ &~ &((\texttt{"w": }))^*
> \end{array}
> $$

---

### 4.3. Simplification

##### 4.3.1. Motivation

- If we simplify after the derivative, then we are building the value for the simplified regular expression, but NOT for the original regular expression.
  $$
  \begin{array}{lclclcl}
  r_1 &\overset{\text{der }a}\longrightarrow &r_2 &\overset{\text{der }b}\longrightarrow &r_3 &\overset{\text{der }c}\longrightarrow &r_4 \ \text{nullable} \\
  \downarrow & ~ & \downarrow  & ~ & \downarrow  & ~ & \downarrow^\text{mkeps}\\
  v_1 &\underset{\text{inj }a}\longleftarrow &v_2 &\underset{\text{inj }b}\longleftarrow & v_3 &\underset{\text{inj }c}\longleftarrow &v_4
  \end{array}
  $$
  
  > e.g.
  >
  > For $r_4$, normally we would have
  >
  > $$
  > r_4 = \text{der } c\ r_3 = (\textbf{0} \cdot (b \cdot c)) + ((\textbf{0} \cdot c) + 1)
  > $$
  > However, if we simplify this to $\textbf{1}$ `mkeps` now, and answer how this regular expression matches the empty string with the value. This would produce $\text{Empty}$, instead of the following correct answer, 
  >
  > 
  > $$
  > \text{Right(Right(Empty))}
  > $$
  >
  
- We would introduce *Rectification* to calculate whenever a regular expression gets simplified. 

##### 4.3.2. Rectification

- Rectification functions
  
  - Simplication rules
  
  $$
  \begin{array}{lll}
  r \cdot \textbf{0} &\mapsto &\textbf{0} \\
  \textbf{0} \cdot r &\mapsto &\textbf{0} \\
  r \cdot \textbf{1} &\mapsto &r &\lambda f_1 f_2 v. \text{Seq}(f_1v, f_2 \text{Empty}) \\
  \textbf{1} \cdot r &\mapsto &r &\lambda f_1 f_2 v. \text{Seq}(f_1 \text{Empty}, f_2v) \\
  r + \textbf{0} &\mapsto &r &\lambda f_1 f_2 v. \text{Left}(f_1v)\\
  \textbf{0} + r &\mapsto &r &\lambda f_1 f_2 v. \text{Right}(f_1v)\\
  r + r &\mapsto &r &\lambda f_1 f_2 v. \text{Left}(f_1v)\\
  \end{array}
  $$
  - The function takes a value as argument and return a rectified value. We could apply them in a depth-first or inside-out search to calculate the simplified regular expression. 
  - Old `simp` returns a rexp; while new `simp` returns a rexp and a rectification function. 
- Recification `Alt(r1, r2)`

  ```scala
  simp(r):
  	case r = r1 + r2
  		let (r_1s, f_1s) = simp(r1)
  				(r_2s, f_2s) = simp(r2)
  		case r_1s = 0: return (r_2s, λv. Right(f_2s(v)))
  		case r_2s = 0: return (r_1s, λv. Left(f_1s(v)))
  		case r_1s = r_2s: return (r_1s, λv. Left(f_1s(v)))
  		otherwise: return (r_1s + r_2s, f_alt(f_1s, f_2s))
  ```

  ```scala
  f_alt(f1, f2):
  	λv. case v = Left(v'): return Left(f1(v'))
  			case v = Right(v'): return Right(f2(v'))
  ```

  1. Recursively call the simplification with $r_1, r_2$. This gives simplified regular expressions $r_{1s}, r_{2s}$. 
  2. Test whether the simplified regular expression are $\textbf{0}$ so to make further simplification. 

- Recification `Seq(r1, r2)`

  ```scala
  simp(r): ...
  	case r = r1 + r2
  		let (r_1s, f_1s) = simp(r1)
  				(r_2s, f_2s) = simp(r2)
  		case r_1s = 0: return (0, f_error)
  		case r_2s = 0: return (0, f_error)
  		case r_1s = 1: return (r_2s, λv. Seq(f_1s(Empty), f_2s(v)))
  		case r_2s = 1: return (r_1s, λv. Seq(f_1s(v), f_2s(Empty)))
  		otherwise: return (r_1s · r_2s, f_alt(f_1s, f_2s))
  ```

  ```scala
  f_seq(f1, f2):
  	λv. case v = Seq(v1, v2): return Seq(f1(v1), f2(v2))
  ```

- Example

  > e.g.
  > $$
  > \underline{(b \cdot c) + (0 + 1)} \mapsto (b \cdot c) + 1
  > $$
  >
  > ```scala
  > f_s1 = λv. v
  > f_s2 = λv. Right(v)
  > 
  > f_alt(f1, f2):
  > 	λv. case v = Left(v'): return Left(f1(v'))
  > 			case v = Right(v'): return Right(f2(v'))
  > 
  > mkeps simplified case: Right(Empty)
  > rectified case: Right(Right(Empty)
  > ```

---

### 4.4. Lexer

##### 4.4.1. Lexing and Records

- Lexing
  $$
  \begin{array}{lll}
  \text{lex}\ r\ [] &\overset{def}= &\text{if nullable}(r) \text{ then mkeps}(r) \text{ else error}\\
  \text{lex}\ r\ a :: s &\overset{def}= &\text{inj}\ j\ r\ a\ \text{lex(der}(a, r), s)
  \end{array}
  $$

  - `lex` returns a value. 
  - This corresponds to the `matches` function. 
    - The first clause we are given an empty string, and need to test whether the regular expression is `nullable`.If yes, we can proceed normally and just return the value calculated by `mkeps`.
    - The second clause is for strings where the first character is $c$, and the rest of the string is $s$. We first build the derivative of $r$ with respect to $c$, simplify the resulting regular expression. We continue lexing with the simplified regular expression and the string $s$.
  
- Records

  - New regex $(x : r)$ and new value $\text{Rec}(x, v)$

  $$
  \begin{array}{lll}
  \text{nullable}(x:r) &\overset{def}= &\text{nullable}(r) \\
  \text{der}\ c\ (x:r) &\overset{def}= &\text{der}\ c\ r \\
  \text{mkeps}(x:r) &\overset{def}= &\text{Rec}(x, \text{mkeps}(r)) \\
  \text{inj}(x:r)\ c\ v &\overset{def}= &\text{Rec}(x, \text{inj}\ r\ c\ v)
  \end{array}
  $$

  ​	for extracting subpatterns `(z:((x : ab) +(y : ba)))`

  - `record` for a regular expression helps to tokenize input strings.
    - While values encode how a regular expression matches a string, records can be used to focus on some particular parts of the regular expression and forget others.  

- Example

  > e.g.
  >
  > A regular expression for email addresses could be represented as
  >
  > `(name: [a-z0-9__ .−]+)·@·`
  > `(domain: [a-z0-9 −]+) ·.·`
  > `(top_level: [a-z .]{2,6})`
  >
  > > An example input is `christian.urban@kcl.ac.uk`
  > >
  > > The result environment: 
  > >
  > > `[(name : christian.urban), `
  > > `(domain : kcl),
  > > (top_level : ac.uk)]`

##### 4.4.2. Environments

- Motivation
  
  - Use a function that takes a value and return all records. 
  
    $$
    \begin{array}{lll}
    \text{env }(\text{Empty}) &\overset{def}= &[] \\
    \text{env }(\text{Char}(c)) &\overset{def}= &[] \\
    \text{env }(\text{Left}(v)) &\overset{def}= &\text{env }(v) \\
    \text{env }(\text{Right}(v)) &\overset{def}= &\text{env }(v) \\
    \text{env }(\text{Seq}(v_1, v_2)) &\overset{def}= &\text{env }(v_1) @ \text{env }(v_2) \\
    \text{env }(\text{Stars}[v_1, ..., v_n] &\overset{def}= &\text{env }(v_1) @ ... @ \text{env }(v_n) \\
    \text{env }(\text{Rec}(x : v)) &\overset{def}= &(x : |v|) :: \text{env }(v) \\
    \end{array}
    $$
  
- While Tokens Example
  $$
  \begin{array}{lll}
  \texttt{WHILE\_REGS} &\overset{def}= & \texttt{(("k": KEYWORD) + } \\
  ~ &~ & \texttt{("i": ID) + } \\
  ~ &~ & \texttt{("o": OP) +} \\
  ~ &~ & \texttt{("n": NUM) +} \\
  ~ &~ & \texttt{("s": SEMI) +} \\
  ~ &~ & \texttt{("p": (LPAREN + RPAREN)) + } \\
  ~ &~ & \texttt{("b": (BEGIN + END)) + } \\
  ~ &~ & \texttt{("w": WHILESPACE))}^* \\
  \end{array}
  $$


##### 4.4.3. Rules

- **Longest match rule **(Maximal Much Rule)
  - The longest initual substring matched by any regular experssion is taken as next token.
- **Rule Priority**
  - For a particular longest initial substring, the first regular expression that can match determines the token. 
