## WEEK I - Introduction to Computability

>[ðŸ  MENU - 6CCS3COM](year3/6ccs3com.md)
>
>â¹ï¸
>
>[âž¡ï¸ WEEK II - Automata](year3/6ccs3com/w2.md)
>
>Outlines:
>
>1. Undecidable Problem
>
>     - Halting Problem
>     - Undecidable Problem
>2. Partial Functions and Computability
>
>     - Motivation
>     - Definition of Partial Function
>     - Computable Functions
>3. Abstract Models of Computation

### 1.1. Undecidable Problem

##### 1.1.1. Halting Problem: Example to Undecidable Problem

- Introduction
  - Whether we can find a program that solves the halting problem exists. i.e., there is a program to check if a program can finsh the computation in finite timesteps.
    - NO. 
- Proof to Halting Problem
  - We construct that
    - $H'$ is a program that takes a program $P$ as input. 
      - If $P(P)$ halts then $H'$ will run forever. 
      - If $P(P)$ runs forever then $H'$ wil halt.
  - In that case, there are contradictions and there is such a program. Thus, halting problem is undecidable and non-computable. 

##### 1.1.2. Undecidable Problem

- Definition
  - If it is possible to design a program to answer a question within a finite time the problem is said to be **decidable**.
  - We say that the *halting problem is undecidable*.
    - The halting problem was one of the first problems to be shown to be undecidable. It demonstrated that there exists a theoretical limit to computability.
    - This proof was formalised by Turing, which required a formal model of a computer (Turing machine).

---

### 1.2. Partial Functions and Computability

##### 1.2.1. Motivation

- Algorthm

  - Initially, algorithms were restrictively considered to be:
    - A **finite** description of a computation in terms of elementary instructions.
    - A **deterministic** procedure: the next step is uniquely defined.
    - **Always produces a result**, no matter that the input is (i.e. it halts).
  - We will focus on how computation mechanisms are expressed, and whether a problem has a computable solution or not, without caring about the efficiency of the algorithms.
  - To allow us to represent unending computations (that do not always return a result), and to abstract away from the unnecessary efficiency details, we will consider programs to be **partial functions**.

- Parital Functions

  - Some expressions do not have a value:

    > e.g.
    >
    > - `True + 3` is not well-defined (we can not add a number and a boolean),
    > - `10/0` is not defined,
    > - the expression `fact(-1)` does not have a value, where `fact` is the recursive function defined as ` fact(x) = if x = 0 then 1 else x * fact(x-1)`

  - The first is a type error: 

    - For any pair of natural numbers, addition produces a result: <u>Addition is a total function on natural numbers.</u>
    - The second is a different problem: division by 0 is not defined. <u>Division is a partial function on the natural numbers.</u>
    - The third case shows that an expression may not have a value because the program that computes it loops: `fact` <u>defines a partial function on the integers</u>.

##### 1.2.2. Definition of Partial Function

- Notation

  - Let $A, B$ be sets. Their **Cartesian product** is denoted by $A \times B$.

  - **Membership** of a set is denoted with $âˆˆ$:

    > e.g.
    >
    > $b \in \{a, b, c\}$
    >
    > $d \notin \{a, b, c\}$
    >
    > $(c, 1) \in \{a, b ,c\} \times \{1, 2\}$

  - $f : A \to B$ indicates that the **function** f takes an input from the set $A$ (**domain**) and produces an output in the set $B$ (**image or codomain**).

    > Note that the elements of $A, B$ are not necessarily atomic, they could contain lists for example.

- Definition

  - A **partial function** $f :A \to B$ is a subset of $A \times B$ (that is,a set of pairs where the first element is in $A$ and the second in $B$) such that if $(x,y) \in f$ and $(x,z) \in f$ then $y=z$.
  - i.e., A function from $A$ to $B$ can be described as a set of pairs, where for each element of $A$ (the input for the function) there is AT MOST ONE result (output) in $B$.
  - If for every element of $A$ there exists an output, the function is **TOTAL**.

- Programs as Partial Functions

  - Computer programs may not return an output (if they loop forever or get stuck), so <u>computer programs define partial functions</u>.
    - For each input there is at most one output.
    - Not all functions can be defined by a program, only the computable functions can.
  - We will focus on computability instead of complexity. 
    - Computability: whether a problem has a computable solution or not, and how the actual computation mechanism is expressed. We will not study complexity

##### 1.2.3. Computable Functions

- Motivation
  - We have seen that some functions are computable and some are not:
    - There are problems for which no program can provide a solution even assuming that the amount of time and space available to carry out the computation is infinite.
- Definition
  - The class of functions on the natural numbers that can (in an ideal world where time and space are unlimited) be computed by a program is called **partial recursive functions** or **computable functions**.

---

### 1.3. Abstract Models of Computation

##### 1.3.1. Computation Models

- Motivation

  - We need a computation model to abstract away from the material details of the programming language and the processor we are using.

    > Sometimes, the class of computable functions is the same, whether we use C, Haskell, or Prolog to describe the functions, and whether we use a Mac or a PC to execute them. 

  - The most well-known abstract models of computation including

    - Turing Machines
    - The Lambda-Calculus

- Computable Functions

  - **Computable functions** are exactly those functions that can be defined by a Turing machine (or a lambda-term).
  - A programming language is **Turing-complete** if any computable function can be written in this language.
  - All general programming languages are complete in this sense. Domain-specific languages may not be Turing-complete.

- Church's Thesis

  - It can be proved that the <u>Lambda-calculus and Turing machines compute exactly the same class of functions</u>.
  - Church's Thesis says that the **same** class of functions on the integers can be computed in any sequential model of computation.