## WEEK II - Automata

>[ðŸ  MENU - 6CCS3COM](year3/6ccs3com.md)
>
>[â¬…ï¸ WEEK I - Introduction to Computability](year3/6ccs3com/w1.md)
>
>[âž¡ï¸ WEEK III - Turing Machine](year3/6ccs3com/w3.md)
>
>Outlines:
>
>1. Finite Automata
>     - Alternative Models of Computation
>     - Formal Languages
>     - Finite Automata
>     - DFA and NDFA
>     - Regular Language and Finite Automata
>2. Push-down Automata (PDA)
>     - Introduction to PDA
>     - Context-free Language and PDA

### 2.1. Finite Automata

##### 2.1.1. Alternative Models of Computation

- Motivation
  - There are two types of models we will focus:
    - Finite automata: used in text processing and typically in the first phase of compilers and interpreters (Lexical Analysis).
    - Pushdown automata: used in parsing (the second phase of compilers and interpreters).
  - These two models are not universal, since they are not powerful enough to express all the computable functions.
    - The Turing Machine is a more general kind of automaton, universal.
  - To understand their roles we introduce formal languages.

##### 2.1.2. Formal Languages

- Components

  - An **alphabet** $X$ is a *finite* set of atomic symbols. i.e., $X = \{x_0, x_1, ..., x_n\}$. 

    > e.g.
    >
    > $B = \{0, 1\}$

  - A **word** (or string) $w \in X^*$, over an alphabet $X$, is a finite sequence of symbols taken from $X$. 

    - Note that the empty string is a valid word over any alphabet. i.e., $\epsilon \in X^*$. 

    > e.g.
    >
    > Binary strings $B^* = \{0, 1, 00, 01, 10, 11, ...\}$

  - A **language** $L$ is a set of words. i.e., $L âŠ† X^*$. 

    -  Usually defined by a **grammar**, rather than an explicit set.

    > e.g.
    >
    > Binary numbers $N = \{0, 1, 10, 11, ...\} âŠ† B^*$

  - A given word belong to a given language means  it is **solvable** by automata (abstract machines). 

- Chomsky hierarchy

  - Depending on the form of the language, identifying valid words can be of varying difficulty.

  - The **Chomsky hierarchy** categorises languages into collections according to their difficulty.

    | Type   | Abstract Machine              |
    | ------ | ----------------------------- |
    | Type-0 | Turing Machine                |
    | Type-1 | Linear-bounded Turing Machine |
    | Type-2 | Pushdown Automata             |
    | Type-3 | Finitet Automata              |

  - Each level of the hierarchy has a corresponding abstract machine, which have varying *memory capabilities*.

##### 2.1.3. Finite Automata

- Features

  - Finite automata are the simplest kind of automata.
  - The computations that they can make are very restricted. However, they have important applications (for instance in lexical analysis).
  - A finite automata can only be in a finite number of different states. It responds to external signals by performing a transition, that is, a change of state.

- Definition

  - A finite automaton with alphabet $X$ is defined by a finite number of states and a set of transitions between states (one transition for each symbol in $X$).

    - A finite automaton is a tuple $(X,Q,q_i,F, \delta)$, where:
      - $X$ is an alphabet (finite set of atomic symbols); 
      - $Q = \{q_0, q_1, ..., q_n\}$ is a finite set of states;
      - $q_i \in Q$ is the initial state;
      - $F âŠ† Q$ is the set of accepting states; and
      - $\delta:Q \times X \to Q$ is the transition function.
    - The language associated with a finite automaton $A$ is the set of words it accepts, denoted $L(A)$.

  - There is a distinguished state, called **initial state**, indicated by an arrow, where the automaton starts, and one or several **final states**, or **accepting states**, indicated by a double circle.

    > e.g.
    >
    > A vending machine
    >
    > ```mermaid
    > graph LR
    > 	0((0)) --5--> 5((5))
    > 	0 --10--> 10
    > 	0 --20--> 20
    > 	5 --10--> 15
    > 	5 --5--> 10((10))
    > 	10 --5--> 15((15))
    > 	10 --10--> 20
    > 	15 --5--> 20((20))
    > 
    > 	
    > ```
    >
    > $X = \{5p, 10p, 20p\}$
    >
    > $L = \text{any sequence of coins adding exactly to }20p$.
    >
    > > $x_1 = [10, 5]$ is NOT a valid word. 
    > >
    > > $x_2 = [10, 5, 10]$ is NOT a valid word. 

##### 2.1.4. Deterministic and Non-Deterministic FA

- Finite Automata as Abstract Machines

  > We could see automata as machines with:
  >
  > - a control unit (states and transition function)
  > - a tape with symbols from the alphabet.
  >
  > The machine starts in the initial state, with the reading head in the first position of the tape.
  >
  > The automaton reads a symbol in the tape, moves to the next symbol and makes a state transition according to the symbol just read.

- Non-deterministic finite automata (NDFA)

  - Our previous definition of finite automata was **deterministic**: the co-domain of the transition function was a single state. Called Deterministic Finite Automata (DFA). 

  - Finite automata can also be **non-deterministic**: the co-domain of the transition function can be a set of states.

  - A non-deterministic finite automaton is a tuple $(X , Q, q_i , F , Î´)$, where:

    - $X$ is an alphabet (finite set of atomic symbols);
    - $Q = \{q_0, q_1, ..., q_n\}$ is a finite set of states;
    - $q_i \in Q$ is the initial state;
    - $FâŠ†Q$ is the set of accepting states; and 
    - $Î´: Q \times (X \cup \epsilon)â†’P(Q)$ is the transition function, where:
      - $P(Q)$ is the power set of $Q$.
      - $\epsilon$ is an empty transition label that can be taken at any point when reading a word.

  - A word is accepted if there is *any* trace from the initial state to an accepting state. Traces can be seen as a threads, proceeding in parallel.

    > e.g.
    >
    > ```mermaid
    > stateDiagram-v2
    > 	[*] --> p
    > 	p --> p : 0, 1
    > 	p --> [*] : 1
    > ```
    >
    > > $1011$ is a valid word.

- NDFA vs. DFA

  - Non-deterministic and deterministic finite automata are **computationally equivalent**.
  - i.e., A language can be recognised by a non-deterministic finite automata iff the language can be recognised by a deterministic finite automata.

##### 2.1.5. Regular Language and Finite Automata

- Regular Language

  - Finite automata have no memory. i.e., They can have no knowledge of previous state.

    - This limits the languages a finite automata can be associated with.
    - Thus, only the simplest languages in the Chomsky hierarchy can be associated with them.
    - These are called **regular languages**.

  - Determine a regular language:

    - Regular languages are **closed under basic set operations**.

      > e.g. union and intersection

    - A language that is **NOT pumpable** is not regular. In other words, a regular language must be pumpable.

- Pumping Lemma

  - Let $L$ be a regular language. There exists a constant $n$ such that 
    if $z$ is any given word in $L$ with more than $n$ symbols, then there are three words $u, v , w$ such that 

    - $z$ can be written as the concatenation $uvw$, where:
      - the length of $uv$ is less than or equal to $n$,
      - the length of $v$ is greater than or equal to 1, and
      - for any $i â‰¥ 0$, $uv^iw \in L$ where $v^i$ represents the word $v$ repeated $i$ times.

  - If a language does not obey the pumping lemma then it cannot be associated with a finite automata. 

  - i.e., the Pumping Lemma can be used to show that whether finite automata can recognise a language. 

    > e.g.
    >
    > $\{ww | w \text{ is a string of 0s and 1s} \}$
    >
    > No finite automata can be used to check whether a certain word belongs to this language or not.

---

### 2.2. Pushdown Automata (PDA)

##### 2.2.1. Introduction to PDA

- Introduciton

  - **Pushdown automata (PDA)** are finite automata but with a stack.
    - This makes them more powerful, and allows them to be associated with more languages in the Chomsky hierarchy.
  - Stacks
    - Stacks are a specialised form of memory, where:
      - only the top element of the stack can be read (`pop`) and in the process it is removed from the stack, and
      - new elements must be added to the top of the stack (`push`).
  - Stacks in PDA store symbols.
    - The stack starts empty.
    - Each transition, a symbol can be popped from the stack, and a symbol can be pushed to the stack.
    - We assume we can always push and pop empty oÌ¨ on the stack, without modifying the stack.

- Definition

  - A PDA is a tuple $(X,Q,Î“,q_i,F,\delta) $, where:
    - $X$ is an alphabet (finite set of atomic symbols);
    - $Q = \{q_0, q_1, ..., q_n\}$ is a finite set of states; 
    - $\Gamma$ is the set of symbols that can be stored on the stack;
    - $q_i \in Q$ is the initial state;
    - $F âŠ† Q$ is the set of accepting states; and
    - $\delta : Q \times (X \cup \epsilon) \times (\Gamma \cup \epsilon) \to P((Q \times (\Gamma \cup \epsilon))$ is the transition function.
  - The transition function $\delta$ now maps a `(state, letter, symbol)` to a **set** of pairs of the form `(state, symbol)`.
    - The symbol in the domain is the symbol to be popped.
    - The symbol in the codomain is the symbol to be pushed.
    - If the symbol is $\epsilon$ (empty) then nothing is to be popped/pushed.
  -  We also allow transitions to be labelled $\epsilon$.
  - A word is accepted if there is *any* trace from the initial state to an accepting state that <u>leaves the stack empty</u>.

  > Note. Non-determinism is built into the definition ($Î´$ returns a set).

  > e.g.
  >
  > ```mermaid
  > stateDiagram
  > 	[*] --> p 
  > 	p --> q : (Îµ, Îµ), Îµ
  > 	p --> p : (0, Îµ), A
  > 	q --> q : (1, A), Îµ
  > 	q --> [*] : (Îµ, Îµ), Îµ
  > ```
  >
  > > $0011$ is a valid word.
  > >
  > > $\epsilon$ is a valid word.
  > >
  > > $1100$ is NOT a valid word. 
  > >
  > > $00011$ is NOT a valid word. 

##### 2.2.2. Context-free Language and PDA

- Context-free Language (CFL)
  - PDA have a limited (stack) memory.
    - This limits the languages a PDA can be associated with.
    - PDA are strictly more powerful than finite automata.
    - PDA can recognise Type-2 languages in the Chomsky hierarchy. 
    - These are called **context-free languages**.
  - Determine a CFL:
    - There is a similar pumping lemma for PDA that demonstrate their limitation. 