## WEEK V - Revision I

>[ðŸ  MENU - 6CCS3COM](year3/6ccs3com.md)
>
>[â¬…ï¸ WEEK IV - Application of Automata](year3/6ccs3com/w4.md)
>
>[âž¡ï¸ WEEK VI - Lambda Calculus I](year3/6ccs3com/w6.md)
>
>Outlines:

1. Decidable
   - A *model of computation* formal defines the computation process, which can be used to define computable.
     - Common model of computation including Turing machine, DFA, lambda calculus, etc. 
     - A model of computation is Turing complete if it is equivalent with a Turing machine.
   - If it is possible to design a program to answer a question within a finite time the problem is said to be **decidable**.
   - *Halting Problem* is undecidable. 

2. Halting Problem: If there is a program to check whether an input program can be terminated in finite steps or not.
   - Halting Problem is undecidable. Proof:
     - Assume there is a program to solve Halting Problem: 
       $$
       H(P) = 
       \begin{cases}
       1 &\text{if }P \text{ teminates in finite steps}\\
       0 &\text{if }P \text{ does NOT teminate in finite steps}
       \end{cases}
       $$
     
     - We then construct a function as follows:
       $$
       H'(P) = 
       \begin{cases}
       \text{loop forever} &\text{if } H(P) = 1 \\
       \text{terminates} &\text{if } H(P) = 0 \\
       \end{cases}
       $$
     
     - By taking the function $H'$ as the input of itself, we find contradiction:
       $$
       H'(H') \implies 
       \begin{cases}
       \text{if } H' \text{ terminates} &\implies H(H') = 0 &\implies H' \text{ does NOT terminate}\\
       \text{if } H' \text{ NOT terminates} &\implies H(H') = 1 &\implies H' \text{ terminates}\\
       \end{cases}
       $$
       thus, such a function $H$ is impossible.
     
   - Variants of the Halting Problem are undecidable as well. 

3. Variants of Halting Problem

   - Using reduction to convert the variant problem into standard Halting Problem. For instance, 

     - Assume a Turing machine $M$ that takes a given input $w$.

     - Assume there is a program to solve the variant problem:
       $$
       H(\langle M, w \rangle) =
       \begin{cases}
       1 &\text{if } M \text{ accepts }w \\
       0 &\text{if } M \text{ does NOT accept }w \text{ or does NOT terminate}
       \end{cases}
       $$

     - Construct a new Turing machine $M'$:
       $$
       M'(w) \implies 
       \begin{cases}
       \text{accept} &\text{if } M(w) \text{ halts} \\
       \text{NOT terminate} &\text{if } M(w) \text{ NOT terminate} \\
       \end{cases}
       $$

     - In that case, if we want to know whether $M$ accepts $w$, it is equivalent to prove whether $M'(w)$ terminates for a given input. This is transferred in to standard Halting problem. 

4. Automata

   - Finite Automata has finite states. It can be used to represent **regular languages**. 

     - Transition: `(state, word) --> new state`

     - Transition can NOT be defined repeatly. 

       > e.g. $\delta_1(q_0, 1) = q_0, \delta_2(q_0, 1) = q_1$ is NOT allowed. 

   - Deterministic Finite Automata (DFA): transition does NOT allow $\epsilon$. The current state of the machine is a deterministic state, instead of a set. 

   - Non-Deterministic Finite Automata (NFA):  transition allows $\epsilon$. The current state of the machine is a set of states.

   - Pumping Lemma: Can be used to check if a language is regular:

     - Assume a word for a given language $z \in L$, which length $|z| \geq n$.
     - The word $z$ can be represented as $uvw = z$, where:
       1. $|uv| \leq n$,
       2. $|v| \geq 1$, i.e., $v$ can NOT be empty,
       3. $uv^iw \in L, i \geq 1$, i.e., repeat the intermindate part $v$ for more than 1 times, the new word is still in the language. 
     - If the langugage does NOT statisfy with these rules, it is not a regular language.

   - If a automata $A$ can recognize the languages $L_1, L_2$, then it can recognize the languages $L_1 \cup L_2$, $L_1 \cdot L_2$. 

   - Finite Automata cannot recognize words like $a^nb^n$. 

5. PDA

   - PDA is a more powerful computational model than finite automata, which has a stack. PDA can recongize **context-free languages (CFL)**.
     - Transition: `(state, word, (pop out, push in)) --> new state`
   - PDA cannot recognise words like $a^nb^nc^n$

6. Turing Machine

   - Turing machine is a more powerful computational model than PDA. It has a pointer, can be used to `move left/right`, `read` and `write` with a tape. 
     - Transition: `(state, read token, write token, pointer direction) --> new state`
     - `pointer direction: ` L or R. 
   - Universal Turing machine: for many variants of Turing machine, they are computational equivalent. Just prove if it is equivalent with the functions  `move left/right`, `read` and `write` of a standard Turing machine. 

7. Parsing

   - Identify a input words as pre-defined grammars.

     - Grammars: Terminals (T) and Non-terminals (NT).
     - Terminals: All the symbols that can NOT be replaced by other grammars.
     - Non-terminals: All the rest 

   - Left-factoring:

     - A common prefix of the grammar. It is not allowed since it raises ambiguous issues when parsing. We need to execute left-factoring to extract them. 

       > e.g.
       >
       > T = T | T + T | T - T
       >
       > > Here `T` is a common prefix. 
       >
       > We can execute left-factoring as follows
       >
       > T = TR
       >
       > R =  Îµ | + T | - T

   - Top-to-down

     - RDP: start from the beginning symbol, replace the left-most token until we get the input words. 
     - Left-recursion need to be reduced before applying Top-to-down parsing.

   - Bottom-to-up

     - Shift-reduce: start from the input words, shift or reduce the left-most token basing on the rules until we get the beginning symbol. 