## WEEK VI - Lambda Calculus I

>[ðŸ  MENU - 6CCS3COM](year3/6ccs3com.md)
>
>[â¬…ï¸ WEEK V - Revision I](year3/6ccs3com/w5.md)
>
>[âž¡ï¸ WEEK VI - Lambda Calculus II](year3/6ccs3com/w7.md)
>
>Outlines:

### 6.1. Lambda Calculus and Turing Machines

##### 6.1.1. Introduction to Lambda Calculus

- Definition

  - The Turing Machine is an *imperative* computational model. While the Lambda Calculus is a *functional* computational model.
  - But they are computationally equivalent models.
    - Church-Turing thesis: a function is Î»-computable if and only if it is Turing-computable.

- Functions in the Lambda Calculus

  -  Functions are **black-boxes**.

    - They do not have an internal representation or implementation.
    - They can be seen as pure operations.

    > e.g.
    >
    > successor function
    >
    > ```mermaid
    > graph LR
    > 	x((x)) --> f[Î»x.x+1]
    > 	f --> x+1((x+1))
    > ```
    >
    > addition
    >
    > ```mermaid
    > graph LR
    > 	x((x)) --> f[Î»x.Î»y.x+y]
    > 	y((y)) --> f
    > 	f --> x+y((x+y))
    > ```
    >
    > 

  - A function can be applied to values.

    > e.g.
    > $$
    > (\lambda x.x+1)2â†’2+1â†’3
    > $$
    > The value 2 is substituted into $x$.

##### 6.1.2. Formal Syntax

- Lambda Calculus Notion

  - Terms in the Lambda calculus are built from the components:
    1. **Variables**
       - We assume variables are taken from an infinite set $\{x, y, z, ...\}$
    2. **Abstractions**
       - If $x$ is a variable and $M$ is a term, then $(\lambda x.M)$ is a term.
    3. **Applications**
       - If $M$ and $N$ are terms, then $(MN)$ is a term.

- Lambda Calculus syntax

  - Application associates to the *left*
    -  Instead of writing $((MN)P)$ we will simply write $MNP$.
  - Abstraction associates to the *right*
    - Instead of writing $Î»x.(Î»y.M)$ we simply write $Î»x.Î»y.M$, or just $Î»xy .M$. 

  > e.g.
  >
  >  $Î»x.(Î»y.x) = Î»xy.x$
  >
  > $Î»x.(Î»y.(xy)) = Î»xy.xy$
  >
  > $(Î»x.(Î»y.x))(y) = (Î»xy.x)y \neq Î»xy.xy$

- Free and Bound Variables

  - In the context of a given term, a variable can be either **free** or **bound**.
  - You can think about free and bound variables by relating them to the concept of program scope.
    - Bound variables are similar to local variables (their value is defined by the given context)
    - Free variables are similar to global variables (their value is defined outside of the given context)

  > e.g.
  >
  > $\lambda x.xy$
  >
  > Here the $x$ is bound and $y$ is free.  

  - We define the set of *free variables* of a term $M$, $FV(M)$, as a recursive function.
    $$
    \begin{array}{lcl}
    FV(x) &= &\{x\} \\
    FV(\lambda x.M) &= &FV(M) - \{x\} \\
    FV(MN) &= &FV(M) \cup FV(N) 
    \end{array}
    $$

    - Terms without free variables are **combinators** or **closed terms**.

  - We define the set of *bound variables* of a term $M$, $BV(M)$, as a recursive function.
    $$
    \begin{array}{lcl}
    BV(x) &= &\{\} \\
    BV(\lambda x.M) &= &\{x\} \cup BV(M) \\
    BV(MN) &= &BV(M) \cup BV(N)
    \end{array}
    $$

##### 6.1.3. Variable capture and Î±-equivalence

- $\alpha$-equivalence

  - Recall that $Î»x.M$ represents a function:
    $$
    \begin{array}
    \ f(x) = M &\text{for all } x
    \end{array}
    $$

  - Therefore, the name of *bound* occurrences of variables is immaterial.

  - So $Î»x.x$ and $Î»y.y$ represent the exact same function as they only differ on the name of their bound variable occurrences.

    - We say they are $Î±$-equivalent. 
    - Denoted $\lambda x.x = \alpha \lambda y.y$

  - $Î»x.yx$ and $Î»x.zx$ are NOT $Î±$-equivalent.

    - We have renamed a <u>free variable</u>.

  - $Î»x.(zx)(zx)$ and $Î»y.(zy)(zx)$ are NOT Î±-equivalent.

    - We have to rename <u>consistently</u>. 

- Variable Capture

  - Variable renaming should preserve the meaning of the term.

  - If we rename a variable in such a way that a variable that was free before but is bound after, then we say that variable has been **captured**.

    > e.g.
    >
    > renaming $y$ as $x$ in the term $Î»y.xy$...
    >
    > gives $Î»x.xx$, we have captured the variable.

  - If we capture a variable when renaming then we will not preserve the meaning of the term.

    - Therefore, we aim to <u>avoid</u> capturing variables to preserve $Î±$-equivalence.

- $\beta$-Reduction

  - Computation in the Lambda Calculus is composed of a series of substitution rewritings, known as $Î²$**-reductions**.
  - A **redex** is a term of the form $(Î»x.M)N$.
    - Redexes can be $Î²$-reduced.
  - The $Î²$-reduction Rule
    $$
    (Î»x.M)N \to_\beta M\{x \mapsto N\}
    $$
    where $M\{x \mapsto N \}$ is the term obtained when we substitute free occurrences of $x$ by $N$.
    - We can apply the $Î²$-reduction rule to any redex in a term, it does not have to be at the start. The redex can be a subterm.
    - If $M \to_\beta M_1 \to_\beta M_2 \to_\beta ... \to_\beta M_n$ then we write $M \to_Î²^* M_n$. 

