## WEEK VII - Lambda Calculus II

>[ MENU - 6CCS3COM](year3/6ccs3com.md)
>
>[猬锔 WEEK VI - Lambda Calculus I](year3/6ccs3com/w6.md)
>
>[★ WEEK VIII - Interaction Nets](year3/6ccs3com/w8.md)
>
>Outlines:

### 7.1. Properties of Lambda Calculuss

##### 7.1.1. Normal Forms

- Definition

  - While some terms can reduce to terms that themselves are reducible, we want to know when to stop applying $\beta$-reductions.

    > i.e. When do we consider a computation finished.

  - **Normal form**: stop when there are no more redexes left to reduce.

  - **Weak-head normal form**: stop when all redexes are under an abstraction.

##### 7.1.2. Non-termination

- Non-termination

  - Some terms do not have a normal form.

    > e.g.
    >
    > $(位q.qq)(位q.qq) = Q$
    >
    > $Q \to_\beta Q \to_\beta Q \to_\beta ...$

  - Such terms represent **non-terminating** computations.

##### 7.1.3. Confluence

- Confluence

  - Recall, $位$-terms can have multiple redexes, and therefore multiple valid $尾$-reductions.

    > e.g.
    >
    > $(位a.aa)((位y .y )z )$
    >
    > > $(位a.aa)z$
    > >
    > > > $zz$
    > >
    > > $((位y .y )z )((位y .y )z )$
    > >
    > > > $z((位y.y)z)$
    > > >
    > > > $((位y.y)z)z$
    > > >
    > > > > $zz$

  - $尾$-reductions are **confluent**.

    - If $M \to_\beta^* M_1$ and $M \to_\beta^* M_2$, there exists a term $M_3$ such that $M_1 \to_\beta^* M_3$ and $M_2 \to_\beta^* M_3$. (Church-Rosser Theorem)

  - Confluence implies unicity of normal forms: Each $位$-term has at most one normal form.

- Reduction strategies

  - Reduction strategy can make a difference in the efficiency of computation, as the number of reduction steps may be different.

    - Outermost vs. Innermost
    - Leftmost vs. Rightmost

    > e.g.
    >
    > Outermost-Leftmost: $\underline{(位a.a)(位b.b)c)((位d.d)e)} (位f .f )(gh)$
    >
    > Innermost-Leftmost: $(位a.a)\underline{((位b.b)c)}((位d.d)e) (位f .f )(gh)$
    >
    > Outermost-Rightmost: $(位a.a)(位b.b)c)((位d.d)e) \underline{(位f .f )(gh)}$

  - The **outermost-leftmost** strategy is guaranteed to find the normal form if one exists, but it may not be the most efficient strategy.

##### 7.1.4. Arithmetic in Lambda Calculus

- Numbers

  - To represent numbers and arithmetic we don't need to introduce digits or additional operators.

  - The natural numbers can be represented with the **Church Numbers**
    $$
    \begin{array}{lcl}
    \bar{0} &= &\lambda xy.y \\
    \bar{1} &= &\lambda xy.xy \\
    \bar{2} &= &\lambda xy.x(xy) \\
    \bar{3} &= &\lambda xy.x(x(xy)) \\
    ...
    \end{array}
    $$
    We use $\bar{n}$ to denote the Church Numeral representing the number $n$.

    > i.e.
    >
    > This indicates the times to apply the operation, say $x$, to the target $y$. 

- Successor function

  - We can define the successor function: the function that takes a number $\bar{n}$ and returns $\bar{n + 1}$.
    $$
    S = 位xyz.y(xyz)
    $$

  > e.g.
  >
  > Check that $S \bar{0} = \bar{1}$ by writing out the term in full, and then applying 尾-reductions.
  >
  > > $$
  > > S \bar{0} = \lambda xyz.y(xyz) \ (\lambda xy.y) \\ 
  > > \implies  \lambda yz. y(xyz) = \lambda yz. y((\lambda xy.y) y z) = \lambda yz. y(z) \\ 
  > > \to_\beta  \lambda xy.xy = \bar{1}
  > > $$
  > >
  > > 

- Addition

  - We can define addition.
    $$
    \text{ADD} = 位xyab.(xa)(yab)
    $$

  > e.g.
  >
  > Check that $\text{ADD } \bar{2}\ \bar{1} = \bar{3}$ by writing out the term in full, and then applying 尾-reductions.
  >
  > > $$
  > > \text{ADD } \bar{2}\ \bar{1} = \bar{3} = \lambda xyab.(xa)(yab) \ (\lambda xy.x(xy))\ (\lambda xy.xy)\\
  > > \implies \lambda ab.(\lambda xy.x(xy) a) (\lambda xy.xy ab) = \lambda ab.(\lambda y.a(ay))(ab) = \lambda ab.a(a(a(b))) \\
  > > \to_\beta \lambda xy.x(x(x(y))) = \bar{3}
  > > $$

- Booleans

  - Boolean values and operators can also be encoded in pure Lambda Calculus.
    $$
    \begin{array}{lcl}
    \text{FALSE} &= &\lambda xy.y \\
    \text{True} &= &\lambda xy.x \\
    \end{array}
    $$

  - We can define the NOT operation as follows:
    $$
    \text{NOT} = 位x.x \text{ FALSE } \text{ TRUE }
    $$

    > e.g.
    >
    > check NOT works for the terms NOT TRUE and NOT FALSE.

- Recursion

  - We define (Haskell) Curry's fixed point combinator as follows:
    $$
    Y = \lambda f.(\lambda x.f(xx)) (\lambda x.f(xx))
    $$

    - The startup accelerator Y-combinator takes it name from Curry's fixed point combinator.
    - Some people consider it worthy of permanent recognition...

  - To apply the combinator to a 位-term:
    $$
    \begin{array}{lcl}
    YM &= &位f .(位x.f (xx))(位x.f (xx)))(M) \\
    ~ &\to_\beta &(位x .M (xx ))(位x .M (xx )) \\
    ~ &\to_\beta &M((位x .M (xx ))(位x .M (xx ))) \\
    ~ &= &M(YM) \\
    ~ &= &M(M(YM)) \\
    ~ &= &...
    \end{array}
    $$

    - The combinator is the basis of recursion in The Lambda Calculus.
