## WEEK I - Introduction to AI

>[ðŸ  MENU - 6CCS3AIN](year3/6ccs3ain.md)
>
>â¹ï¸
>
>[âž¡ï¸ WEEK II - Probabilities](year3/6ccs3ain/w2.md)
>
>Outlines:
>
>1. General concepts of AI
>1. Intelligent Agent

### 1.1. General concepts of AI

##### 1.1.1. Definitions

##### 1.1.2. Types of AI

##### 1.1.3. Three strategies of AI

##### 1.1.4. Application of AI

---

### 1.2. Intelligent Agent

##### 1.2.1. Intelligent autonomous agents

- Definition
  - An agent is a software system that

    - is situated in an environment
    - is capable of perceiving some or all of its environment, and
    - is capable of acting in its environment

    with the goal of satisfying its objectives

- Properties

  - Proactive - Try to achieve specific goals
  - Reactive - Respond to their perceptions of their environments
  - Social - Be aware of other entities in their environment
  - Autonomous - to a grater or lesser extent

- Factors

  - Environment
  - Sensors
  - Effectors or actuators

- Constraints on decisions

  - Option Uncertainty
  - Incommensurability
  - Outcome uncertainty
  - Resource constraints
  - Time constraints


##### 1.2.2. Rational Agent

- Ideal diagram
- Challenges

##### 1.2.3. Environments

- Deterministic, Stochastic
  - Deterministic - Any action has a single guaranteed effect.
  - Stochastic - We can quantify the non-determinism with probability. 
- Episodic, Sequential
  - Episodic - Performance of an agent is dependent on a number of discret episodes, without link between the performance of an agent in different episodes. 
  - Sequential - Current decision affects future decisions. 
- Dynamic, Static
- Discrete, Continuous

##### 1.2.4. Terminologies

- A *run* - A sequence of interleaved states and actions. When an agent acts in an environment it generates a run. 
- *Utility* - A quantitative value that measures how good a state is. (Depends on the expected reward value. )
  - Expected Utility
  - Challenges