## WEEK X - Revision II

>[🏠 MENU - 5CCS2PLD](year2/5ccs2pld.md)
>
>[⬅️ WEEK IX - Logical Programming II](year2/5ccs2pld/w9.md)
>
>[⏹️](year2/5ccs2pld/w10.md)
>
>Outlines:
>
>This week is just the summary for the previous 4 weeks. 

### 3'. Definitions

##### 3'.1. Functional Programming

- Functional Programs and functions

  - **Functional programs** consist entirely of functions.
  - **Functions**
    - A function can be defined in terms of other functions (previously defined by the programmer, in libraries or language primitives).
    - Functions are also values, even though we cannot display or print them.
    - Functions are defined in terms of equation. 
  - **Curryfication**
    - Applying a function to *n* > 1 arguments yields another function with *n* − 1 arguments. This allows one to create new functions by partial application.
- Strategy of evaluation 

  - **Strategy** - A strategy defines the reduction sequence that the language implements. 
  - **Call-by-name** - Reduce first the application using the definition of the function, and then the argument.
  - **Call-by-value** - Evaluate first the argument, and then the application using the definition of the function.

##### 3'.2. Types and Typing

- **Types** - Define the possible values of a variable. 
  - **Typing** - Checking that types are being used in the correct way. 
  - **Static Typing **- Typing is checked before execution at compile time. 
  - **Dynamic Typing** - Typing is checked during execution, i.e., at run time. 
- Polymorphic
  - Definition
    - **Polymorphic** - some expressions have more than one type.
    - **Monomorphic** - every expression has at most one type
  - Methods to implement polymorphic
    - **Generic or polymorphic type** - represents the set of its *instances*, obtained by substituting type variables by types.
    - **Overloading** -  A related notion (also called *ad-hoc polymorphism*) where several functions, with different types, share the same name.
    - Subtypes
- User-defined types
  - We can define our own new types by declaring the *data* and *type* **constructors** of that type.
    - **Type constructor** - Define new polymorphic types.
    - **Data constructor** - Used to build terms of a type. 
- Well-defined terms
  - The set of **well-typed terms** can be defined using a relation $\Gamma \vdash_\epsilon t : \tau$​
  - The **well-typedness relation** - Is inductively defined by the a system of axioms and rules.


##### 3'.3. Logic Programming

- Logic programming concepts
  - A *declarative* style of programming - *i.e., The program says <u>what should be computed</u> rather than how it is computed.*
  - **terms** - Domain of computation, which is defining using *variables* or *function symbols*. 
  - **predicate** - Expressing a relationship between elements of the domain
    - If $p$ is a predicate of arity $n$ and $t_1,...,t_n$ are terms, then $p(t_1,...,t_n)$ is an **atomic formula**. 
    - **literal** - A literal is an atomic formula $A$, or a negated atomic formula $¬A$​.
- Clauses
  - **Horn clause** - a disjunction of literals of which at most one may be positive.
  - **Facts** - A Horn clause with no negative literals
  - **Rules** - A Horn clause with one positve literal and some negative literals
  - **Goals** - A horn clause with only negative literals.


##### 3'.4. Substitution

- **Values** - terms associates to variables by means of automatically generated substitutions.
- **Substitution** - a partial mapping from variables to terms, with a finite domain.

##### 3'.5. Unification

- **Unification** - the process of intuition for logic programming, and experimenting with the language
  - A **unification problem** $\mathcal{U}$ - A set of questions between terms containing variables. 
  - A **unifier** - A substitution $σ$ as a solution to $\mathcal{U}$, such that when applied to every term in $U$, for each equation $s_i=t_i$, the terms $s_{jσ},t_{jσ}$​ are syntatically identical.
  - The **most general unifier (mgu)** is a unifier $σ$ such that any other unifier $ρ$ is an instance of $σ$​.

##### 3'.6. Resolution

- **Resolution** - seeks to show that $P∪\{¬G_1∨...∨¬G_n\}$ leads to a **contradiction**, with the goal of proving the goal that `:- G1, ..., Gn` with respect to a set $P$​​ of program clauses. 
  - A **contradiction** is obtained when a literal and its negation are stated at the same time, that is, both $A$ and $¬A$. 
  - **Resolvents** -  A new derived goal that by unifying the current goal with a program clause. 
- 




---

### 4'. Describing Functional Programming Language





---

### 5'. Describing Logic Programming Language

