## [WEEK V - Revision I](https://keats.kcl.ac.uk/pluginfile.php/9681310/mod_resource/content/6/Week5-revision.pdf)

>[ðŸ  MENU - 5CCS2PLD](year2/5ccs2pld.md)
>
>[â¬…ï¸ WEEK IV - Induction & Structural Operational Semantics](year2/5ccs2pld/w4.md)
>
>[âž¡ï¸ WEEK VI - Introduction to Functional Programming I](year2/5ccs2pld/w6.md)
>
>Outlines:
>
>



### 1'. Definitions

##### 1'.1. Programming Languages and Designing

- **Programming Language**

  - Definition
    - Tools for writing software. 
    - Are used in several phases in the software development process. 

- **Design Method**

  - Definition
    - A design method is a guideline for producing a design *(e.g. functional or object-oriented design)*.
    - Older languages such as Fortran do not support any specific design method, but more modern languages were designed to support a specific design method. 
    
    > Note.
    >
    > If the design method is not compatible with the language the programming effort increases.

- **Programming Paradigms**

  - Definition
    - A programming language may enforce a particular style of programming, which is a programming paradigm.
  - Types
    - **Imperative Languages**
      - Programs are decomposed into computation steps, reflecting the computer architecture.
    - **Functional Languages**
      - Based on the mathematical notion of function. The focus is on what should be computed, not how it should be computed.
    - **Logic Languages**
      - Programs describe a problem rather than defining an algorithmic implementation.
    - **Object-oriented Languages**
      - This feature can be added to any of the above paradigms *(i.e., there are OO imperative languages, OO functional languages, etc)*.

- Components of a programming language
  - **Syntax** - Defines the form of programs. 
  - **Semantics** - Gives the meaning of programs. 
  - **Implementation** - A software system that can read a program and execute it in a machine, plus a set of tools *(editors, debuggers, etc)*

##### 1'.2. Implementation of programming languages

- **Execution** - The execution of machine code occurs in a process called fetch-execute cycle.
- Methods
  - **Compilation** - The compiler <u>translates the entire source language into machine language</u> that can be executed directly on the computer.
  - **Interpretation** - The program is executed by <u>an interpreter which simulates a machine whose fetch-execute cycle</u> deals with high-level program instructions.
  - **Hybrid Implementation** - Some languages are implemented <u>by compilation to an intermediate language instead of machine language</u>. This intermediate language is then interpreted.

##### 1'.3. Syntax of programming languages

- Syntax
  - Components
    - An **alphabet** - the set of characters that can be used,
    - A **set of rules** - indicating how to form expressions, commands, etc.
  - Types
    - **Concrete Syntax** - describes which chains of characters are well-formed programs.
    - **Abstract Syntax** - describes the syntax trees, to which a semantics is associated.
- **Grammar**
  - Definition
    - The concept that we used to specify a language.

  - Components
    - An **alphabet**
    - **Rules**
    - **Initial Symbol**


##### 1'.4. Semantics of programming languages

- Types
  - **Static Semantics**, or **Typing** 
    - The goal is to detect *(before the actual execution of the program)* programs that are syntactically correct but will give errors during execution.
  - **Dynamic Semantics**, or **Semantics** 
    - Specifies the meaning of programs.
- Informal Semantics, Formal Semantics
- Semantics styles
  - **Operational semantics** 
    - Definition
      - The meaning of each construct is given <u>in terms of computation steps</u>. 
    - Compoents
      - A set **Config of configurations or states**
      - A binary **transition relation**
  - **Denotational semantics **- The meaning of expressions (and in general, the meaning of the constructs in the language) <u>is given in an abstract, mathematical way (using a mathematical model for the language)</u>. 
  - **Axiomatic semantics** - <u>Uses axioms and deduction rules</u> in a specific logic. 
- **Abstract Machine** - Useful for implementing a programming language, since they describe the execution of each command.

##### 1'.5. Imperative Language

- **Imperative Language**
- **Variable**
  - Definition
    - An <u>abstract storage location paired with an associated symbolic name</u>, which contains some known or unknown quantity of data or object referred to as a value
  - Properties
    - **Name** - usually a string of characters with some constraints *(e.g. maximal length, etc)*.
    - **Type** - indicates the range of values that are allowed as well as the operations that are available. Some languages are untyped, others are **statically typed** *(e.g., Java, Haskell, ML, Scala)* or **dynamically typed** *(e.g., Python, Ruby)*.
    - **Address** - the memory address to which the variable is associated (also called *l-value*).
    - **Value** - the contents of the memory associated with the variable (also called *r-value*).
    - **Lifetime** - the time during which the variable is allocated a specific memory location (between allocation and deallocation). There are <u>four types of variables</u> according to their lifetime.
    - **Scope** - the range of instructions in which the variable is visible (can be used).
      - **Static Scope** - can be determined before the execution of the program <u>(at compile time)</u>.
      - **Dynamic Scope** - depends on the calling sequence of subprograms instead of their declaration <u>(at run time)</u>.
  - Types
    - **Static variables** - Bound to a memory location <u>before program execution begins and until it ends</u>.
    - **Stack dynamic variables** - <u>Allocated when the declaration of the variable is processed</u> at run time.
    - **Explicit heap-dynamic variables** - Nameless memory cells that <u>are allocated and deallocated by program instructions, using pointers</u>.
    - **Implicit heap-dynamic variables** - Bound to storage <u>only when they are assigned values</u>.
- Flow Control
  - **Control Statement** - Programs in imperative languages are sequences of instructions. The next instruction that will be executed is the one that follows in the text of the program, unless a control statement is used.

- Program Structure
  - **Blocks** - A block is a group of statements, delimited by keywords such as begin and end, or by separators. 
  - **Subprogram** - Subprogram is a generic name for a named block that can be invoked explicitly.
  - **Parameters** - When a subprogram is declared, together with the name we can associate *parameters*. 


---

### 2'. Computation Methods

##### 2'.1. 





