## WEEK VIII - Logical Programming I

>[🏠 MENU - 5CCS2PLD](year2/5ccs2pld.md)
>
>[⬅️ WEEK VII - Functional Programming Types and Semantics](year2/5ccs2pld/w7.md)
>
>[➡️ WEEK IX - Logical Programming II](year2/5ccs2pld/w9.md)
>
>Outlines:
>
>19. Introduction to Logical Programming
>       - Basic Concepts
>       - Prolog
>            - Syntax Basics
>20. Clauses and Substitutions
>       - Basic Definitions
>         - Clauses, Facts, Rules, Goals
>       - Variable Substitutions
>         - Methods
>         - Motivation
>21. Built-in predicates, Lists and Language Limitations
>       - Built-in Predicates
>       - Lists in Prolog
>       - Language Limitations
>         - Negation => Negation as Failure mechanism
>         - Disjunction => Rewrite Disjunction as implication with using Negation as Failure. 

### 19. Introduction to Logical Programming

##### 19.1. Basic Concepts of Logic Programming

- Definition

  - The main idea behind *Logic Programming* is to combine logic and proramming: 
    - Logic is used to express knowledge, describe the program, etc. 
    - Inference is used to compute, manipulate knowledge, and obtain a solution to the problem. 
  - Evaluation
    - Pros ✅
      - Knowledge-based programming. 
      - It is a *declarative* style of programming. *i.e., The program says <u>what should be computed</u> rather than how it is computed.* 
      - Precise and simple semantics. 
      - The same formalism can be used to specify a problem, write a program, prove properties of the program. 
      - The same program can be used in many different ways.

      > Note. 
      >
      > The previous properties are shared with functional programming while the last property is only for logic programming. 
      
      > e.g.
      >
      > Consider the following Prolog program to reverse a list of elements, and the three queries A), B) and C) to the program.
      >
      > ```Prolog
      > reverse([], []). 
      > reverse([H|T], List) :- reverse(T, Z), append(Z, [H], List). 
      > 
      > # A)
      > ? - reverse([1, 2, 3], X). 
      > X = [3, 2, 1].
      > 
      > # B)
      > ? - reverse(X, [3, 2, 1]). 
      > X = [1, 2, 3]. 
      > 
      > # C)
      > ? - reverse([1, 2, 4], [3, 2, 1]). 
      > false. 
      > 
      > ```
      >
      > Notice that the variable `X` was used in different argument positions in `A)` and `B)` and that no variables were used in `C)`. 
      >
      > This is because unlike in a functional programming language, there is no intrinsic notion of "input" and "output" variables. 
      
    - Cons ❌
      - Ability to support efficient arithmetic and input/output operations such as file handling, are provided at the expense of declarative semantics. 
      - Most logic languages are restricted to a fragment of classical <u>first-order logic</u>. There are some languages based on more powerful logics, but they are not widely used. 

##### 19.2. Introduction to Prolog

- Definition

  - A famous Functional Programming language - Prolog
  - Introduction
    - SWI Prolog
      - At startup a message will appear, followed by the goal prompt `?-`
      - To load a program from a local file, type `?- ['myprogram.pl'].`
  

##### 19.3. Syntax Basics

- Language Definition

  - Domain of computation - **terms**. 
    - The set of terms is defining using, 
      - *variables*, represented by $X, Y, Z, ...$
      - and *function symbols*, with fixed arities represented by $f, g, h, ...$ or $a, b, c, ...$ for constants or arity zero. 
    - A term is either a **variable**, or **has the form $f(t_1, ..., t_n)$**, where $f$ is a function symbolof arity $n$ and $t_1, ..., t_n$ are terms. 
    
      > e.g.
      >
      > If $a$ is a constant, $f$ is a binary function, and $g$ is a unary function, and $X, Y$ are variables, then the following are possible terms:
      >
      > - $X$
      > - $a$
      > - $g(a)$
      > - $f(X, g(a))$
      > - $Y$
      > - $f(f(X, g(a)), Y)$
      > - $g(f(f(X, g(a)), Y))$

  - Predicate symbols, atomic formulas and literals
    - Let $p, q, r, ...$ represent predicate symbols, each with a fixed arity.
    - If $p$ is a predicate of arity $n$ and $t_1, ..., t_n$ are **terms**, then $p(t_1, ..., t_n)$ is an **atomic formula**, $A, B, ...$
    - A **literal** is an atomic formula $A$, or a negated atomic formula $\neg A$. 

    > Note. 
    >
    > You can think of a predicate symbol as expressing a relationship between elements of the domain. e.g., Use the predicate `father_of(peter, paul)` to express the fact that Peter is Paul's father. 

    > e.g.
    >
    > If `rainy` and `snowy` are unary predicates, `temperature` is a binary predicate, `celsius` is a unary function symbol, `tuesday` and `zero` are constants. Then the following are possible literals: 
    >
    > >`temperature(tuesday, celsius(zero))`
    > >`¬rainy(tuesday)`
    > >`snowy(X)`
    >
    > Notice that 
    >
    > 1. Only terms can be used as arguments in predicates. 
    > 2. `celsius(zero)` is a (unary) function term. 

    > e.g.
    >
    > If `a` is a constant, `f` a binary function, and `g` a unary function, and `X`, `Y` are variables, which of these are valid terms; if not, why not?
    >
    > - `(X, a)` ❌
    > - `g(X)` ✅
    > - `g(f)` ❌
    > - `f(X, f(X, g(f(Y, a))))` ✅

    > e.g.
    >
    > If `p` is a binary predicate, and `q` a unary predicate, which of these are valid literals; if not, why not?
    >
    > - ` ¬p(X, a)` ✅
    > - `q(g(Y), a)` ❌
    > - `¬p(q(g(Y), g(a)))` ❌ Since only terms can be used as arguments to predicates but `q` is a predicate.  

---

### 20. Clauses and Substitutions

> Summary: 
>
> Clauses, Facts, Rules, Goals
>
> - Clauses - Horn clause - a disjunction of literals with at most one positve literal
> - Facts - A Horn clause with no negative literals
> - Rules - A Horn clause with one positve literal and some negative literals
> - Goals - A horn clause with only negative literals. 

##### 20.1. Clauses, Facts, Rules and Goals

- Terminology

  - **Horn clause** - a disjunction of literals of which at most one may be positive. 
    - It may have single positive literal and some negative literals, or
    - a single positive literal (and no negative literals), or 
    - only negative literals. 
  - Special Definite clauses
    - A definite clause comprising a single positive literal $A$ is called a **fact**. 
    - A definite clause with some negative literals is called a **rule**. *i.e., $A \vee \neg B_1 \vee ... \neg B_n$*. 

      > *Programs* are sets ofdefinite clauses, so they <u>are composed of facts and rules</u>. 

    - A Horn clause that contains only negative literals $\neg B_1 \vee ... \vee \neg B_n$ is called a **goal**, notated as 
      `:- B1, B2, ..., Bn`

      > A goal can be thought of as *query* of the program. 

- Rules

  - Recall on the formula rules
    - A formula $A \vee \neg B_1 \vee ... \vee \neg B_n$​ can be re-written as 
      $$
      \neg (B_1 \wedge B_2 \wedge ... \wedge B_n) \vee A
      $$
      which is equivalent to the formula
      $$
      (B_1 \wedge B_2 \wedge ... \wedge B_n) \to A
      $$

  - In Prolog parlance
    - We read the implication backwards: "$A \text{ if } B_1 \text{ and } B_2 \text{ and ... and } B_n$". 
    - The $\text{if}$ is represented by the symbol `:-` and the conjunction by a comma, giving that 
      `A :- B1, B2, ..., Bn`

- Facts

  - Facts are <u>unconditional statements about the world</u>. 
    - They can be used in the base case of recursive definitions and in Prolog <u>they must appear before rules</u>. 

      > e.g.
      >
      > ```Prolog
      > factorial(0, 1).
      > factorial(X, N) :- X>0, X1 is X-1, factorial(X1, N1), N is X*N1
      > 
      > ```
      >
      > Note that we cannot pass `X-1` directly as an argument to `factorial`, so we must first instantiate the result to variable `X1`. 
      >
      > This will not work if `x` is not bound in the call to `factorial`. 

- Variables

  - The role of variables in clauses/programs
    - We have defined a literal as being constructed as an atomic formula, whose term may be or contain variables. 
    - Used in a program, all clauses are individually universally quantified on all variables. 

      > e.g.
      >
      > The clauses
      >
      > ```Prolog
      > likes(X, P) ∨ ¬based(P, Y) ∨ ¬likes(X, Y)
      > attends(X, Y) ∨ ¬registered(X, Y) ∨ ¬likes(X, Y)
      > 
      > ```
      >
      > actually represent the universally quantified formulaes below
      >
      > ```Prolog
      > ∀X∀P∀Y ((based(P, Y) ∧ likes(X, Y)) → likes(X, P))
      > ∀X∀Y ((registered(X, Y) ∧ likes(X, Y)) → attends(X, Y))
      > 
      > ```

      >e.g.
      >
      >If `rainy` and `snowy` are unary predicates, `temperature` is a binary predicate, `celsius` is a unary function symbol, `tuesday` and `zero` are constants, and `X` and `Y` are variables, then the following are possible clauses.
      >
      >- `rainy(tuesday)`
      >- `temperature(tuesday, celsius(0))`
      >- `snowy(X) ∨ ¬raining(X) ∨ ¬temperature(X, celsius(Y)) ∨ ¬leq(Y, 0)`
      >- `¬snowy(X)`
  
  - Intuition
  
    - Wrting horn clauses using Prolog's syntax
      - Prolog fact (Horn clauses with one postive literal and no negative literals)
        ```Prolog
        rainy(tuesday).
        temperature(tuesday, celsius(0)). 
        ```
  
      - Prolog rule (Horn clauses with one postive literal and some negative literals)
        ```Prolog
        snowy(X) :- rainy(X) temperature(X, celsius(Y)), Y =< 0.
        ```
  
      - Prolog goal or query (Horn clauses with only negative literals)
        ```Prolog
        :- snowy(X). 
        ```
  
    - Resulting Prolog program and query
      ```Prolog
      # Program:
      rainy(tuesday).
      temperature(tuesday, celsius(0)). 
      snowy(X) :- rainy(X) temperature(X, celsius(Y)), Y =< 0.
      
      # Query: 
      :- snowy(X). 
      
      ```
  
  - Informal procedural mechanism
    - We try to "solve" the goal `:- snowy(X)` by looing for clauses with the same predicate in the head.
      1. If a match is found, we replace `snowy(X)` by the body of the matching clause, replacing variables as required for the matching (substitutions)
      2. Our new goal then becomes
          `:- rainy(X), temperature(X, celsius(Y)), Y =< 0. `
      3. Proceeding in the same way, we can solve `rainy(X)` by replacing `X` by `tuesday`, so the new goal becomes
         `:- temperature(tuesday, celsius(Y)), Y =< 0. `
      4. The next literal can be solved by making replacing `Y` by 0, finally yeilding the goal `0 <= 0`, which also succeeds, so the original goal succeeds (`=<` is built-in). 
  
    > e.g.
    >
    > Assuming $p, q$ are predicates, $f, g$ are functions, $X, Y$ are variables, $a, b$ are constants, which of the formulas below is a rule, which is a fact and which is a goal? 
    >
    >- $p(g(Y), a)$ - fact - `p(g(Y), a). `
    >- $\neg p(X, a) \vee \neg q(Y)$ - goal - `:- p(X, a), q(Y).`
    >- $q(f(Y, a)) \vee \neg q(X) \vee \neg p(Y, g(a))$ - rule `q(f(Y, a)) :- (q(X)), p(Y, g(a)). `
    >- $\neg q(f(a, g(Y)))$ - goal - `:- q(f(a, g(Y))). `
    >- $q(a) \vee p(b, g(X))$ - NOT a Horn clause.s

##### 20.2. Variable Substitutions

- Substitutions

  - Definition
    - **Values** are terms associates to variables by means of automatically generated substitutions. 
    - **Substitution** is a partial mapping from variables to terms, with a finite domain.
      - A substitution $\sigma$ is written as a mapping $\{X_1 \mapsto t_1, ..., X_n \mapsto t_n\}$. 
      - $\text{dom}(\sigma)$ denotes the domain of the substitution $\{X_1, ..., X_n\}$. 
    
    > Note.
    >
    > We always <u>replace variables with terms</u> (not the other way around), because only variables can be replaced and not all terms are variables. 
    >
    > *Term* stands for something is known like constants or operators, while *variables* are something unknown. 

  - Applying substitutions
    - A substitution $\sigma$ is applied to a term $t$ or a literal $L$ by simultaneously replacing in $t$ or $L$ each variable occuring in $\text{dom} (\sigma)$ by the terms associated to the variable in $\sigma$. 
    - The resulting term or literal is denoted $t_\sigma$ or $L_\sigma$. 
    - Consider the substitution $\sigma = \{X \mapsto Y, Y \mapsto a\}$. 
      - $\sigma$ is a set. If we were to apply $\sigma$ to a term $t$, in sequence, say from left to right, we would effectively replace $X$ by $a$ in $t$. 
      - In fact, we need to replace $X$ by $Y$ at the same time that we replace $Y$ by $a$ in $t$. 
      
      > e.g.
      >
      > - Simultaneous replacement
      >
      >   $t = f(f(X, g(a)), Y)$
      >   $\sigma = \{X \mapsto g(Y), Y \mapsto a\} $
      >   $t_\sigma = f(f(g(Y), g(a)), a) $
      >
      > - Variables that do not appear in the terms or literal are not affected by the application
      >
      >   $L = \neg p (X, X, f(g(a), Y))$
      >
      >   $\sigma = \{X \mapsto f(a, b), Y \mapsto Z, Z \mapsto b\}$
      >
      >   $L_\sigma = \neg p (f(a, b), f(a, b), f(g(a), Z))$


- Motivation of substitutions

  - Substitutions represent variable bindings and are used in the instantiation of unviersally quatified variables. 
  - Consider the goal `:- r(a). ` and the program $P$:

    ```Prolog
    p(a).
    p(b).
    q(a).
    r(X) :- p(X), q(X)
    
    ```

    - We would like to resolve the negative literal `r(a)` in the goal with an instance of the postive literal `r(X)`, but we need to commit to `x` being bound to the constant `a` first. 
    - This can be done if we apply the substitution $\sigma = \{X \mapsto a\}$ to the rule `r(X) :- p(X), q(X). `, giving us the instance `r(a) :- p(a), q(a). `

- Clauses in Prolog

  - A program in Prolog is a list of fact and rules as defined, using its own syntax.
  - In first-order programs, all variables are assumed to be <u>universally quantified</u>. 
  - The <u>order in which the clauses are defined</u> is **critical** to the evaluation of the program, because resolution is applied in program apperance order.
  - Whtin a goal, a selection function chooses the next literal to "resolve". In Prolog, the selection function always chooses the left-most literal in the goal.
  - If query succeeds, the variables correspond to the answers to the query and are obtained as by-product of the resolution process (to be explained). 

  > e.g.
  >
  > ```Prolog
  > based(prolog, logic). 
  > based(haskell, maths). 
  > likes(claire, maths). 
  > likes(claire, logic). 
  > likes(max, logic). 
  > 
  > likes(X, P) :- based(P, Y), likes(X, Y). 
  > 
  > ```
  >
  > This program consists of 5 facts and 1 rule. Sample goals may like
  >
  > ```Prolog
  > :- likes(claire, haskell).
  > :- likes(max, L), likes(claire, L)
  > :- likes(Z, prolog)
  > ```

---

### 21. Built-in predicates, Lists and Language Limitations

##### 21.1. Built-in Predicates

- Predicates

  - The programmer can freely choose the names of variables, function symbols and predicate symbols. However, there are some built-in predicates with specific meanings. 
    - Operators: `+,-, *, /` and `=, >, <, =<, >=`
    - Evaluation: `is`
    - Control: `call/1, fail/0, !/0` (cut)
    - Tuples: `','`
    - "univ" predicate: `=..`
    - I/O: `write, nl`

    > e.g.
    >
    > `+ (3, 2)` or `3 + 2` and `> (X, 2)` or `X > 2`
    >
    > `is(X, *(+(3 ,2), 2))` or `X is (3 + 2) * 2`
    >
    > `','(cat, dog)` or `(cat, dog)`
    >
    > `L =..[p | [a, b]], call(L) => L = p(a, b)`, then call `p(a, b)` (it is like a constructor for function with parameters)
    >
    > `write("error")`

    > The notation `p/n` indicates that the predicate symbol `p` has arity `n`. i.e., The number of parameters of this perdicate. 

- Examples

  > e.g.
  >
  > ```Prolog
  > rainy(tuesday).
  > temperature(tuesday, celsius(-4)). 
  > snowy(X) :- rainy(X), 
  > 	temperature(X, celsius(Y)), Y =< 0.
  > 	
  > ```

  > e.g.
  >
  > ```Prolog
  > fact(0, 1). 
  > fact(X, N) :- X > 0, Y is X - 1,
  > 	fact(Y, N), N is X * M
  > 	
  > ```

  > e.g.
  >
  > ```Prolog
  > hanoi(X) :- move(X, left, right, middle). 
  > 
  > move(1, X, Y, _) :- write([X, "->", Y]), nl. 
  > move(N, X, Y, Z) :- M is N - 1, 
  > 	move(M, X, Z, Y),		# move N-1 plates to the middle
  > 	move(1, X, Y, Z), 	# move the largest 1 plate to the right
  > 	move(M, Z, Y, X). 	# move the rest N-1 plates to the left
  > 	
  > ```

  > e.g.
  >
  > Assume the binary predicate `temperature(X, Y)` express the temperature `Y` on day `X`, and let `follows(X, Y)` be a binary predicate indicating that day `Y` follows day `X`. 
  >
  > >The predicate `hot/1` decides whether the temperature on a given day is over 30 degrees celsius.
  > >
  > >```Prolog
  > >hot(Day) :-
  > >	temperature(Day, celsius(Temp)), Temp > 30. 
  > >	
  > >```
  >
  > >Using `hot/1` to write a predicate `heatwave(M, N)` that expresses that it has been above 30 degrees celsius on consecutive days from `M` to `N`.
  > >
  > >```Prolog
  > >heatwave(Day, Day) :- hot(Day). 
  > >heatwave(First, Last) :- hot(First), 
  > >	follows(First, Next), heatwave(Next, Last). 
  > >
  > >```

##### 21.2. Lists in Prolog

- Prolog syntax

  - Like functional programming, **linked lists** are very important data structure and have their own special syntax.
    - The constant `[]` denotes the empty list.
    - The built-in predicate `|` is the cons operator that joins an element `X` to the front of a list `L`, `[X | L]`
    - `[X | [Y | [Z | []]]]` is abbreviated to `[X, Y, Z]`. 
  - Pattern match
    - The pattern `[]` only matches with the empty list and the pattern `[H | T]` only mathces with a non-empty list.
      > e.g.
      >
      > For a query `[H | T] = [1, 2, 3]`, Prolog will answer with `H = 1, T = [2, 3]`

    - In general,
      - `H` is called the **head** of the list `[H | T]`. 
      - `T` is called the **tail** of the list `[H | T]`. 
      - Built-in predicates for common operations: `member/2, length/2, sort/2...`

- Examples

  > e.g.
  >
  > The predicate `append(S, T, U)` expresses that the result of appending the list `T` onto the end of the list `S` is the list `U` (predefined). 
  >
  > ```Prolog
  > append([], L, L). 
  > append([X | L], Y, [X | Z]) :- append(L, Y, Z). 
  > 
  > ```

  > e.g.
  >
  > Write clauses to define predicates `member/2`, `length/2` and `reserve/2` such that
  >
  > - `member(X, L)` checks whether `X` is contained in list `L`.
  > - `length(L, N)` expresses the length of list `L` in variable `N`. 
  > - `reverse(L, R)` checks whether the list `R` is the reverse of the list `L`. 
  >
  > > ```Prolog
  > > member(X, [X | _]).
  > > member(X, [_ | T]) :- member(X, T)
  > > 
  > > length([], 0). 
  > > length([_ | T], N) :- length(T, M), N is M + 1. 
  > > 
  > > reverse(L, R) :- reverseAux(L, R, []). 
  > > reverseAux([], A, A). 	# The third list arugment A is an accumulator
  > > reverseAux([X | L], R, A) :-
  > > 	reverseAux(L, R, [X | A]). 
  > > 	
  > > reverse([], []).
  > > reverse([H | T], L) :- reverse(T, L1), append(L1, [H], L). 
  > > 
  > > ```

##### 21.3. Language Limitations

- Negation

  - Prolog programs are composed of definite clauses, which contain **exactly one** postive literal. 
    - This means that it is not possible to directly state *facts* involving negative statements, nor *rules* with a negative literal in the head. 

      > e.g.
      >
      > - `p(a).` - ✅
      >- `¬p(b).` - ❌ not allowed
      > - `r(X) :- p(X). ` - ✅
      >- `¬r(X) :- p(X). ` - ❌ not allowed
    
  - Technical motivation
    - Computation is done in terms of the resolution rule given in general form below
      $$
      \frac{A \vee B \ \neg A \vee C}{B \vee C} (\text{Res})
      $$
      Any two clauses can be resolved as long as they contian complementary literals, potentially generating multiple results. 
  
      > e.g.
      >
      > The possible resolutions of $A \vee B$ and $\neg A \vee \neg B \vee C$ are the following, 
      >
      > - $B \vee \neg B \vee C$ (from resolving $A, \neg A$)
      > - $A \vee \neg A \vee C$ (from reolving $B, \neg B$​)
  
    - Difficulties with general resolution
      - If there are no restrictions on the construction of the clauses, 
        1. Clauses can be resolved *in multiple ways*. 
        2. Futhermore, we need to arbitrarily choose the next pair of clauses to resolve. 
      - To address these diffculties,
        1. Clauses in a program must have <u>exactly one postive literal</u> (they are "Definite"), and 
        2. Clauses in the <u>goal only contain negative literals</u>.
      - Consequences
        - The resolution of a program clause with a goal can be made *unique and deterministic* (if we use program order and employ a selection function) - **Selective**
        - The resolvent of two clauses will either be *empty* or *generate a new goal* - **Linear**
  
- Negation as Failure (Intution)

  - Definition
    - To mitigate for the lack of logical negation, Prolog uses a weaker form of negation called **Negation as Failuer**. 
      - Informally, failure to prove a literal $A$ is taken as proof that $\neg A$, follows.
      - Using this principle,m a negative literal $\neg A$ is then allowed to appear in the *body* of a clause (and hence in the goal as well). 
    - In Prolog, negation as failure is represented as `\+`, 

      > e.g.
      >
      > ```Prolog
      > p(a).
      > q(a).
      > s(b).
      > r(X) :- p(X), q(X), \+ s(X). 
      > 
      > ```
      >
      > In the above program `¬p(b)`, `¬q(b)` and `¬s(a)` are indirectly assumed to be true, since their positive counterparts fail. 

  - Examples

    > e.g.
    >
    > Program
    >
    > ```Prolog
    > p(a).
    > q(a).
    > s(b).
    > r(X) :- p(X), q(X), \+ s(X). 
    > 
    > ```
    >
    > Some queries
    >
    > `:- p(a). ` => suceeds. Therefore `:- \+ p(a). ` => fails. 
    >
    > `:- q(a). ` => suceeds. Therefore `:- \+ q(a). ` => fails. 
    >
    > `:- s(a). ` => fails. Therefore `:- \+ s(a). ` => succeeds. 
    >
    > `:- r(a). ` => suceeds. Since `p(a), q(a), \+ s(a). ` succeed. Therefore `:- \+ r(a). ` => fails. 
    >
    > `:- r(b). ` => fails. And so on. 

- Disjunction

  - Prolog programs are <u>sets of definite clauses</u>. 
    - This means that each clause is a disjunction of literals of which at most one is positive and hence it is not possible to represent a disjunction $A \vee B$ fairly. 
      - If we were to add the facts `A. ` and `B. `, we would get $A \wedge B$ which is logically stonger than $A \vee B ( A \wedge B \vdash A \vee B \text{, but } A \vee B \nvdash A \wedge B)$
    - We can re-write $A \vee B$ as $\neg A \to B$ or $\neg B \to A$, which would translate as the rules `B := \+ A` or `A := \+ B`. 
    - However, this does not have the same effect of a disjunction due to the negation as failure. 
