## WEEK I - Network Layer

> Outlines:
>
> - Architecture of the Internet network layer
> - Board structure of messaging and key aims of IP protocol
> - Route IP messages via simple routing strategies
> - Key messages of ICMP & how they are exploited by utilities

---

#### 1. Naming and Topology

> ref: 
>
> [What is IP - CLOUDFLARE](https://www.cloudflare.com/zh-cn/learning/network-layer/internet-protocol/)
>
> [TCP/IP addressing and subnetting basics - MS](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/troubleshoot/windows-client/networking/tcpip-addressing-and-subnetting)
>
> [Subnet masks (IPv4) and prefixes (IPv6) - IBM](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ts3500-tape-library?topic=formats-subnet-masks-ipv4-prefixes-ipv6)

***1.1. Concept*** Internet Protocol

> Application - Web - Transport - Network - Network Interface
>
> ↕️ *physical layer delivery* ↕️
>
> Application - Web - Transport - Network - Network Interface

- Definition

  - `Internet Protocol(IP)` - A kind of protocol or regulations with the following functionality: 

    - **Route datagrams** between two network interfaces. 

    - Fragment datagrams according to physical layer characteristics. 

  - `IP address` - An unique identifier that is allocated to the devices that connected with the Internet. 

    >A communcation protocol that combined with IP will decide how to deal with the datagrams after receiving them. The most common protocols are `TCP` and `UDP`. 

- Network Layer -  allows for decentralised and localised name management. 

  - `Computer network` - network of devices
  - `Host` - device connected to wired or wireless networks by <u>network interface controllers</u>
  - `Router` - device connected to multiple networks by <u>using multiple network interface controllers</u>
  - `Local area network (LAN)` - *typically < 1km*
  - `Wide area network` - *typically covers wide area, may involve lease lines*
  - Topology
    - `Incomplete graph` - not all nodes are connected
    - `Directed graph` - *✅ student can access kcl but ❌ kcl cannot access student*

***1.2. Concept*** IP Address Naming

> Network Interface Controller (NIC)
>
> >Hardware identifier: MAC address - 48 bits
> >
> >Network identifier: IP address - 32 bits (IPv4) / 128 bits (IPv6)
>
> Static vs Dynamic allocation of IP address: 
>
> > IPv4 Address: No unallocated
> >
> > IPv6 Address: Relies on 64 addresses

- MAC address

  - `Network Interface Controller (NIC)` - A computer hardware component that connects a computer to a computer network. Be uniquely identified by a MAC address (hardware) and a 32-bit IP address (network). 

  - `MAC address (Media Control Address)` - **unique identifier for NIC**, printed in hardware for network interface controller

  - 6 groups of 2 hexadecimal digits, i.e., 48 bits. 

    Manufacturers have a range of address

    > e.g. Range for MS
    >
    > <u>00:15:5D</u>:<u>00:00:00</u> - 00:15:5D:FF:FF:FF 
    >
    > <u>Organizationally Unique Identifier</u> : <u>Manufacturer specific</u>

  - *MAC address* only used for <u>communication in physical layer</u>

- Host/Domain names for human consumption

  - `Domain name system(DNS)`

- IPv4 Address

  - `IPv4 address` **identifies the network interface** of a device over the Internet

    > A device may have multiple addresses

  - **32 bits** long - 4,294,967,296 addresses as maximum

    > Notation: 4 bytes separated by dots, each byte in range [0, 255]
    >
    > e.g. 137.73.113.232

    - $n$ bits prefix + $32-n$ bits suffix

      All hosts in a network **share the same network prefix**

      > e.g. 
      >
      > :red_circle::red_circle::red_circle::red_circle::red_circle::red_circle::large_blue_circle::large_blue_circle:
      >
      > Network prefix + Host suffix

    - Notation: Taking IPv4 address <u>137.73.113.232/24</u>  as an example

      - `Subnet mask` 24

        > Subnet mask for IPv4 is for storing the information of subnet
        >
        > It devides an IP address in two parts: 
        >
        > > 24 (i.e. $n$) bits to Identify the belonging network
        > >
        > > 8 (i.e. $32-n$) bits Identify the host computer

        > *137.73.113.232/<u>24</u>* implies that in 32-bit binary foramt, there are continous 24 times of '1', i.e., *<u>255.255.255.0</u>*. An alternative expression is *137.73.113.232/<u>255.255.255.0</u>*
        >
        > IP address $\wedge$ Subnet mask = Network Address
        >
        > So the length of the network prefix $n=24$, the length of the host prefix $n=8$, number of the hosts is $2^8-2=254$ as a result.

      - `Network address` 137.73.113.0

      - `Broadcast address` 137.73.113.255

      - `Number of addresses` 256

      - `Number of hosts` 254

    - Computation

      - Number of addresses on network is $2^{32-n}$

        > 2 reserved addresses: 
        >
        > - Network address (suffix set to 0s)
        > - Broadcast address (suffix set to 1s)

      - Number of host addresses is $2^{32-n}-2$

  - Special IPv4 address

    - Loopback address  `127.0.0.0/8`

      > For the software loopback interface of a machine. 
      >
      > Not physically connected to a network.
      >
      > `127.0.0.1` is the standard address for IPv4 loopback traffic. 

    - Private addresses `10.0.0.0/8`

      > NAT (Network address translation allow for private addresses to communicate with remote hosts over the Internet)

    - Private addresses `192.168.0.0/16`

    - Broadcast `255.255.255.255/32`

- IPv6 Address

  - `IPv6 address` Internet standard since 2017

  - **128 bits** long - $2^{128}$ as maximum number of addresses

    - Notation: colon hexadecimal notation

      8 sections of 2 bytes each, each section noted with 4 hexadecimal digits

      > e.g. 
      > fe80::227e:fd2e:3eea:b64/64
      > An alternative expression is <u>fe80:0000:0000:0000</u>:<u>227e:fd2e:3eea:0b64</u>
      >
      > :red_circle::red_circle::red_circle::red_circle::large_blue_circle::large_blue_circle::large_blue_circle::large_blue_circle:
      >
      > Network prefix (network location) + Interface ID (unique identifier)

      `Netmask` **64 leftmost bits** (4 sections) = `Network address` 48 bits + `Subnet address` 16 bits

      `Device address` **64 rightmost bits** (4 sections)

      > Different from IPv4, IPv6 could store the information of the subnet directly inside the address

- Governance 

  - IP Address space is managed by *Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA)*. 

  - *IANA* delegates allocations of IP address blocks to *Regional Internet Registries (RIR)*. 

    > Including AFRINIC, APNIC, ARIN, LACNIC, RIPE NCC


---

#### 2. Network Layer and Routing

> ref: 
>
> [What is Routing - CLOUDFLARE](https://www.cloudflare.com/zh-cn/learning/network-layer/what-is-routing/)

***2.1. Concept*** IP Message

- Definition

  > (Transport Data)
  >
  > *⬇️ Encapsulation*
  >
  > [(IP Data) + IP Header]
  >
  > *⬇️ Encapsulation*
  >
  > {[Frame Data] + Frame Header}

  - `IP Message` or `datagram` or `packet` - A basic transfer unit associated with a pakcet-switched network. Consits by the following components: 
    - header
    - data contents - provided by the transport layer (TCP) or other protocols. 
  - `Payload` - The full IP Message (Header + data) which is for the layer below. 

***2.2. Concept*** IP Datagram Header

- Definition
  - `IP Header` - Contains information about IP for addressing and routing. 
  
- Component (of IPv4 Header)

  - A mandatory section of **20 bytes**, including: 

    - The **source** and **destination address** (both are 32 bits) of the message. 

      > **Source** is identified for error or ack messages to be returned back

    - **Total Length** (16 bits) defines the entire packet size in bytes (header + data). 

    - **Protocol** (8 bits) specifies the protocol used in the data portion of the IP datagram. 

    - **Time to Live (TTL)** (8 bits) to avoid forwarding messages infinitely in a loop

      > i.e., TTL field is an integer in range [0, 255]
      >
      > Whenever a message is forwarded, its TTL value is decreased. 
  
    - Other information...
  
  - An optional section of the same length
  
  Therefore, the <u>minimum size of a header is 20 bytes</u> (without data) and the <u>maximum size</u> is 65,535 bytes (i.e., $2^{16}-1$).  

***2.3. Concept*** IP Routing

- Definition
  - `IP Routing` - the route that transferring the datagrams from the source address to their destintation address. 

- Components

  - Routing tables

    > Checking it by `netstat -r` on MacOS

    - `Destination` - network or host
    - `Gateway` - the next-hop intermediary *via which packets should be routed*
    - `Genmask` - network mask for destination
    - `Iface` - network controller interface

  - Forwarding algorithm - Use routing tables to forward incoming messages/datagrams to their next hop. 

  - Routing protocol - Maintain dynamic routing tables. 

    - Routing within administrative domain

    - Routing between administrative domains

---

#### 3. Fragmentation and Diagnostics

***3.1. Concept*** Fragmentation

- Definition

  > Due to the existence of MTU, for network with smaller MTU, a datagram needs to be divided in smaller packets, each with a size smaller than MTU. 
  >
  > > e.g.
  > >
  > > For Ethernet, MTU is 1500
  > >
  > > Maximum length of an IP datagram is $2^{16}-1=65535$ bytes

  - `Fragmentation` - The operation to divide datagram into smaller packets. 
  - `Maximum Transfer Unit (MTU)` - Maximum size for data field of a packet structure at physical layer. 
  - `IP Fragmented Packet` - The smaller IP packet after being fragmented. 
  - Fragmentation can occur at any router. 

- Reassembly

  > A fragement itself may be fragemented if it is forwardde through a network with a smaller MTU (i.e., if necessary). 

  The reassembly of the datagram is done **by the destination**, as each fragement may be routed by a different path. 

  - Prerequirements

    > Note: IP does not have the capability of requesting a fragment that is missing or corrupted

    - To reassemble fragments, the destination will use *the fragement offset* to determine the order for reassembling fragments. 
    - To reassemble a datagram, all fragments need to **have been delivered**. 

- Header Information

  > Considerring the header of a datagram. It includes the following data: 
  >
  > - `Flag` (3 bits)
  > - `Fragment Offset` (13 bits)
  
  - Structure of a fragment
  
    - Each fragment has its own header.
  
    - Every fragment must be a multiple of 8 bytes (except for the last one). 
  
    - First $n-1$ fragments have MF flag set to 1. 
  
    - Last fragment has MF flag set to 0. 
  
      > e.g. Datagram payload $5560 = 3 * 1480 + 1120$
      >
      > > Before fragmentation
      > >
      > > | Identifier | Total Length | DF Flag | MF Flag | Fragment Offset | Payload Bytes |
      > > | :--------: | :----------: | :-----: | :-----: | :-------------: | :-----------: |
      > > |    724     |     5580     |    0    |    0    |        0        |   0 - 5559    |
      > >
      > > After fragmentation
      > >
      > > | Identifier | Total Length | DF Flag | MF Flag | Fragment Offset |   Payload Bytes    |
      > > | :--------: | :----------: | :-----: | :-----: | :-------------: | :----------------: |
      > > |    724     |     1500     |    0    |    1    |        0        |      0 - 1479      |
      > > |    724     |     1500     |    0    |    1    |       185       |    1480 - 2959     |
      > > |    724     |     1500     |    0    |    1    |       370       |    2960 - 4439     |
      > > |    724     |     1140     |    0    |    0    |   <u>555</u>    | <u>4440</u> - 5559 |
      >
      > Note: 
      >
      > 1. Fragement Offset * 8 = The beginning of Payload Bytes, i.e. $555*8=4440$. 
      > 2. DF *(Don't Fragment)* Flag=0 implies fragmentation operation is allowed. 
      > 3. MF *(More Fragment)* Flag=1 implies there exist following fragments. 
      > 4. Total Length includes the header. 
      >

***3.2. Concept*** ICMP & Diagnostics

- Definition

  - `Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP)` - Helps determine if a host or route is alive, since Internet Protocol has no mechanism to query.  There are two types of ICMP messages: 
    - `Error reporting` messages - report error situation to the original source
      - Destination unreachable - *Generated by a router to <u>inform the source host</u> that destination address is unreachable*. 
      - Time execeeded - *Generated by a router when <u>the TTL field in the header is 0</u>*. 
    - `Query` messages
      - **Echo-request** & **Echo-reply** - *determine whether two systems <u>can communicate</u> with each other*. 
      - **Timestamp-request** & **Timestamp-reply** - *determine the <u>round-trip time</u> needed for an IP datagram to travel between hosts*. 

- Exploitation to the key messages
  - PING 
    - PING Utility
    
      > Host/Router = send ping_echo_request => Host/Router
      >
      > Host/Router <= listen ping_echo_response = Host/Router
      >
      > Estimate round-trip time in ms. 
    
    - PING Messages
    
  - Traceroute - A diagnostic tool that tracks the pathway of a packet on netwrk from source to destination. 

    - Traceroute Utility - Sends UDP messages with increasing TTL values

      > When a router receives a message with TTL=1, it descards it and send back an ICMP Time exceeded message. 
      >
      > When the destination receives the UDP at an unexpected port, it responds with an ICMP Host Unreachable. 

---

#### [4. Tools](https://keats.kcl.ac.uk/pluginfile.php/9675484/mod_resource/content/4/1_6-tooling-hands-on-wireshark.pdf)

> Another kind of exercises about Wireshark

- Wireshark

  A tool that could show us fragments and how they are reassembled. 

---

#### 5. Crossing-Cutting Concerns

***5.1. Concept*** Session/State

- IP
- Datagrams
- 

***5.2. Concept*** Security

***5.3. Concept*** Reliability

