## WEEK X - Linked (Open) Data

>[ðŸ  MENU - 5CCS2INS](year2/5ccs2ins.md)
>
>[â¬…ï¸ WEEK IX - Semantic web](year2/5ccs2ins/w9.md)
>
>â¹ï¸
>
>Outlines:
>
>- Linked Data Principles
>  - Five Star Evaluation
>- JSON-LD

### 33. Linked (Open) Data

##### 33.1. Linked Data

- Definition
  - `Linked Data` - a set of **design principles** for sharing machine-readable interlinked data on the Web.
- Principles
  1. Use URIs as names for things
  2. Use HTTP URIs so that people can look up those names.
  3. When someone looks up a URI, provide useful information, using the standards (RDF*, SPARQL)
  4. Include links to other URIs so that they can discover more things.
- Evaluation
  - On the web
  - Machine-readable data
  - Non-proprietary format
  - RDF standards
  - Linked RDF
  
- Life Cycle (Just one possible answer)
  1. Generate
  2. Validate
  3. Publish
  4. Query
  5. Enhance
- Publishing Linked Data


---

### 34. JSON-LD

##### 34.1. JSON-LD

- Definition

  - `JSON-LD` - Stands for JavaScript Object Notation for Linking Data. A lightweight Linked Data format. 
    - New things from JSON
      - a **universal identifier** mechanism for JSON objects via the use of IRIs - `@id`
      - a way to disambiguate keys shared among different JSON documents by mapping them to IRIs via a **context** - `@context`
      - a mechanism in which a value in a JSON object may refer to a **resource on a different site** on the Web, - `@type`
      - the ability to annotate strings with their **language**,
      - a way to associate **datatypes** with values such as dates and times,
      - a facility to express one or more **directed graphs**, *such as a social network, in a single document*.

- Decorator

  - `@id - IRIs` - Linked data is based on unique identifiers for things

    - JSON-LD offers unambiguous identification using the *@id* keyword
    - Developers can use different names for keys on JSON but they can avoid ambiguity linking them to some vocabulary *such as schema.org*
    - And also unambiguously identify our values as IRIs

    > e.g.
    >
    > ```JSON
    > "https://schema.org/url": {
    > 	"@id": "https://www.kcl.ac.uk/people/"
    > }
    > ```

  - `@context` - A context maps a term to an IRI

    - Make the doucment not be quite verbose and hard for the human reader
    - A context can be embedded in the document or referenced using a URL

  - `@type` - Used to specify the class of a node

    - A node can be assigned more than one type using an array.
    - The value of a @type key can be a term in the active context

>e.g.
>
>George Bush, the 41st President of the United States is the father of George W. Bush, the 43rd President of the United States.
>
>```json
>{
>"@context": "https://schema.org", "@type": "Person",
>"name": "George Bush", "disambiguatingDescription": "41st President of the United States",
>"children": {
>"@type": "Person",
>"name": "George W. Bush", "disambiguatingDescription": "43rdPresident of the United States"
>}
>}
>```





