## WEEK III - Transport Layer, Web Layer

>Outlines:
>
>- 

#### 10. Flow Control for Transport Layer

***Theorem 10.1.*** Sliding Windows

- Definition
  - `Flow Control` - avoid a situation in which the sender sends data too fast, and the receiver is unable to receive/process it reliesly. 
  - TCP uses flow control protocol based on *a sliding window mechanism*. 
    - In each TCP segment, the receiver specifies in **the receive window field** - the amount of addtional data (in bytes)
    - The data is willing to buffer for the connect. 

- Sliding Window

  >  Think of TCP sequence numbers and receive windows as a clock: 
  >
  > - The receive window <u>shifts</u>: each time the receiver receives and acknowledges a new segment of data. 
  > - Once it runs out of sequence numbers: the sequence number loops back to 0.
  > - A receiver advertises a window size of 0: stop sending data. 

Example 10.1. 



> ```mermaid
> 	sequenceDiagram
> 		Client ->> Server: data=2KB, SEQ=0
> 		Server ->> Client: ACK=2048, WIN=2048
> 		Client ->> Server: data=2KB, SEQ=2048
> 		Server ->> Client: ACK=4096, WIN=0
> 		Note left of Client: Sender is BLOCKED
> 		Server ->> Client: ACK=4096, WIN=2048
> 		Note left of Client: Sender is ENABLED
> 		Client ->> Server: data=1KB, SEQ=4096
> 		
> ```
>
> - To make the protocol robust to potential loss of messages, the sender starts the persist timer. 
> - If no subsequent window size update is received from the receiver (because it is lost or corrupt), when the persist timer expires, the TCP sender attempts recovery by sending a small packet so that the receiver responds by sending another acknowledgement containing the new window size. 

---

#### 11. HTTP Layer

***Theorem 11.1.*** HTTP Message

- Definition
  - `Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP)`
  - `HTTP Message`
- Component
  - `Start Line`
    - Request: 
      - One of the HTTP methods
      - An abosulte URL path
      - The HTTP version
    - Response: 
      - The HTTP version
      - A status code
      - A status text
  - `Headers`
  - `Body`

***Theorem 11.2.*** Naming of Resources

- `Uniform Resource Identifier (URI)` - A compact string of characters for identifying a resource (abstract or physical)

  > i.e., URI is a name for a resource. 

  - The names follow a well-defined syntax and intended to reference resource *[RFC7230]*

  > e.g. 
  >
  > `https:` // `www.example.com` `/some/hierachial/path` ? `key1=value1` # `section`
  >
  > `scheme` // `hostname` `path info` ? `query string` # `fragment`

  - Opacity of URIs
    - Used to refer to a resource. 
    - Compare two URIs. 
    - Clients are not meant to look at the contents of the URI string to gain other infomation. 

- URI and Variants

  > URL\URN $\in$ URI $\in$ IRI

  - `URL` - Uniform Resource Locator
  - `URN` - Uniform Resource Name
  - `URI` - Uniform Resource Identifier
  - `IRI` - Internationalized Resource Identifier

***Theorem 11.3.*** Web and resources

> `Identifier` =*identifies*=> `Resources` =*is represented by*=> `Representation`

- The Web - **a network of sources**
  - Does not limit the nature of a resource
  - Defines an interface that might be used to interact with resources
  - **HTTP** of the web provides a uniform interface to Web resources
  - Client/Server model is adopted: 
    - Client: desiring to interact with a resource (according to its lifecycle)
    - Server: “hosting” the resource
  - Each resource is identified by a **Uniform Resource Identifier (URI)** *[RFC7230]*
  - Using HTTP, a client can interact with a resource by sending a request message to the target URI

- Resources 

  - Definiton

    Can be anything that has identity (Including abstract things)

    > e.g. document, image, service, a collection of resources, ..., friendship, ...

    Not all resources are network retrievable

    > e.g. human beings, corporations...

  - Lifecycle of a resource - "CRUD"

    - Create
    - Read
    - Update
    - Delete