## WEEK VII - Client-side Interaction with Services

>[ðŸ  MENU - 5CCS2INS](year2/5ccs2ins.md)
>
>[â¬…ï¸ WEEK VI - Markup Languages](year2/5ccs2ins/w6.md)
>
>[âž¡ï¸ WEEK VIII - Web Services](year2/5ccs2ins/w8.md)
>
>Outlines:
>
>- Document Object Model (DOM)
>- JavaScript
>- JSON
>- AJAX

#### 27. Document Object Model (DOM)

###### ***Theorem 27.1.*** The Document Object Model (DOM)

> e.g. 
>
> ```html
> <!DOCTYPE html>
> <html>
>   <head></head>
>   <body>
>     <p>Hello World!</p>
>     <table>
>       <tbody>
>         <tr>
>           <td>Good morning!</td>
>         </tr>
>         <tr>
>           <td>Good afternoon!</td>
>         </tr>
>         <tr>
>           <td>Good evening!</td>
>         </tr>
>       </tbody>
>     </table>
>   </body>
> </html>
> ```

- Definition
  - `DOM` - Programming interface for HTML or XML
    - Used to **PARSE XML**
    - Represents a page and its elements and attributes so that they can be manipulated
    - Defined by the living standard from WHATWG - https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/
    - Implementation by browsers vary
    - Was designed to be independent of the language
  - `DOM Events` 
    - Actions that occur derived from the user interacting with an element/node, a network activity or the change of state of the DOM tree.

***Example 27.1.*** DOM Events

>| Mouse Events | Keyboard Events | Form Events | Document/Window Events |
>| ------------ | --------------- | ----------- | ---------------------- |
>| click        | keypress        | submit      | load                   |
>| dblclick     | keydown         | change      | resize                 |
>| mouseenter   | keyup           | focus       | scroll                 |
>| mouseleave   |                 | blur        | unload                 |

---

#### 28. JavaScript and JSON

###### ***Theorem 28.1.***  JavaScript

> For Client-side applications, we need a new language since we have the following requirements: 
>
> - Not only static content, 
> - Customise interactions through events, 
> - Valid forms (HTML 5 includes some validations and input still need to be checked on the server-side given that you may encounter malicious handling of requests), 
> - Connect to servers, etc. 

- Definition

  - `JavaScript` - A programming language that "derives" from ECMAScript
    - Can be used both in client-side and servers-side
    - Bult into browsers (but users can turn it off)
    - Security: each tab has its own execution environment however there are advanced techniques to exchange data and code between them.
    - Interpreted (although these days browsers use just- in-time compiling for efficiency), i.e., Running order is important. 
    - Case sensitive

- The basics

  - Variables and datatypes

    - Dynamic typing- **NO DECLARATION of type** when creating a variable

  - Functions - A block of code to perform a specific task

    - Can be assigned to variables, passed as arguments, etc.
    - Promotes reuse and modularity.

  - Positions to add - Using the html `<script>` element

    - In-line
      - Possible but a <u>bad pratice</u>
    - Internal
      - Use the `<head>` section to include your scripts but still <u>bad</u> for reuse
    - External
      - Use the `<head>` section to refer to an external file with the scripts

  - Time to exectue

    - A `<script>` tag is found in the document

      An event occurs

      >load pages, click, mouseup, mousemove, etc. 

- jQuery - A JavaScript library

  - Basic syntax: `$(selector).effect(handler);`
    - jQuery object: `$`
    - Selectors: `.class`, `#id`, ...
    - Effect: Action to be performed on the element: `hide`, `fadeIn`, ...
    - Handler: Callback functions that
      - Are passed as an argument, and
      - Are executed after its parent function has completed.
  - There are many other frameworks and libraries, like Vue.js, React, Angular, etc.

###### ***Theorem 28.2.***  JSON

- Definition

  - `JSON` - JavaScript Object Notation
    - Data exchange format
      - Text-based
      - Lightweight
      - Human-readable
    - **Language-Indenpent**
    - **Key-value pairs**

- JSON Object - A mapping from *Keys* to *Values*

  - Values can be other JSON objects.

    > e.g. 
    >
    > ```javascript
    > {
    > 	"name": "Robert Greener", 
    >   "emailAddress": [
    >     "robert.2.greener@kcl.ac.uk", 
    >     "notmyrealemail@example.com"
    >   ]
    > }
    > ```
    >
    > In this example, there are two keys `name` (stores a string) and `emailAddress` (stores an array with two elements). 

  - JSON datatypes

    1. Strings

    2. Numbers

    3. Booleans

    4. Arrays

    5. Objects (JSON Objects)

    6. Null

    Note: JSON doesn't accept comments

  - JSON format and JavaScript Objects

    JSON format is **ALMOST identical** to native JavaScript objects.

    - JSON object (keys **must** be a string)

      `{"title": "Introduction"}`

    - JavaScript object (keys **can be** strings, numbers or identifier names 

      `{title: "Introduction"}`

    - JavaScript values can also be of the same datatypes as JSON values and also: 

      a function, a date or undefined

- Parse and Stringfy

  > As the objects are different, these two methods help us converting between JavaScript and JSON. 

  - Parse
    - JSON data will arrive from the server as text
    - Need to parse it with `JSON.parse()` for the data to become a JavaScript object that you can manipualte. 
  - Stringfy
    - Sending or returning data to the server - data need to be a string
    - Need to use `JSON.stringfy()`
  - Exceptions: dates, arrays and functions that need a special treatment. 

###### ***Theorem 28.3.***  Asynchronous JavaScript and XML (AJAX)

- Definition on AJAX

  - `AJAX` - Asynchronous JavaScript and XML

    - A group of technologies that let you make requests using JavaScript without having to reload a web document

      > HTML & CSS, JavaScript, DOM, XMLHttpRequest Object, JSON & XML &XLT

    - XML  is one of the formats that can be used

- Data Formats 

  - Data can be transmitted into

    - XML

    - JSON

    - HTML

  - However, any data format can be used.

  - Security issues

    > e.g.
    >
    > - Using a user's session data to execute code in a malicious server
    > - XSS (Cross-site scripting)

- Working Process

  1. An event occurs in a web *page*
  2. An *XMLHttpRequest* object is created by JavaScript
  3. The *XMLHttpRequest* object sends a request to a web *server*
  4. The *server* processes the request
  5. The *server* sends a response to the *page*
  6. The response is read by JavaScript
  7. Proper action (like page update) is performed by JavaScript

###### ***Theorem 28.4.*** The XMLHttpRequest Object

- Definition

  - `XMLHttpRequest` - API to provide scripted clients with the functionality of <u>transferring data between the client and a server</u>
    - All contemporary browsers support the XMLHttpRequest object. 
    - It is defined by a living standard from WHATWG

- Syntax

  - Basic syntax - `variable = new XMLHttpRequest();`

  - Sending requests - `open(method, url, async)`

    > e.g. 
    >
    > `send()` - for **GET**
    >
    > `send(string)` - for **POST**

    - Method - **POST** or **GET**
    - URL - the server file location
    - Async - true for asynchronous and false for synchronous

  - Receiving responses

    - `onreadystatechange` property - defines a function to be executed when the status of the request changes

    - `readyState` property - store the state of the **request**

      > 0 - unset
      >
      > 1 - opned
      >
      > 2 - headers received
      >
      > 3 - loading
      >
      > 4 - done

    - `status` and `statusText` - store the status of the **response**

      >status: 200, 403, 404, ...
      >
      >statusText: OK, Forbidden, Page not found, ...

  ***Example 28.2.*** AJAX with XMLHttpRequest & with jQuery

  > e.g.
  >
  > AJAX with XMLHttpRequest (Reading a JSON)
  >
  > ```html
  > <!DOCTYPE html>
  > <html>
  >   <head>
  >     <script>
  >       function loadJSON() {
  >         const xhttp = new XMLHttpRequest();
  >         xhttp.onreadystatechange = function() {
  >           if (this.readyState == 4 && this.status == 200) {
  >             document.getElementById("demo").innerHTML = this.responseText
  >           }
  >         };
  >         xhttp.open('GET', 'http://localhost:3302');
  >         xhttp.send();
  >       }
  >     </script>
  >   </head>
  >   
  >   <body>
  >     <h2>The XMLHttpRequest Object</h2>
  >     
  >     <p id="demo"></p>
  >     <button type="button" onclick="loadJSON()">Load JSON response</button>
  >   </body>
  > </html>
  > ```
  >
  > AJAX with jQuery (Reading a JSON)
  >
  > ```html
  > <!DOCTYPE html>
  > <html>
  >   <head>
  >     <script src="https://ajax.googleapis.com/ajax/libs/jquery/3.5.1/jquery.min.js"></script>
  >     <script>
  >       $(document).ready(()=>{
  >         $("button").click(function(){
  >           $.ajax({
  >             "url":"http://localhost:3302", 
  >             "type":"GET",
  >             "data":{}, 
  >             "dataType":"JSON"
  >           })
  >           .done((data)=>{
  >             let txt = JSON.stringify(data);
  >             $("#demo").html(txt);
  >           })
  >         })
  >       });
  >     </script>
  >   </head>
  >   
  >   <body>
  >     <h2>The XMLHttpRequest Object</h2>
  >     
  >     <p id="demo"></p>
  >     <button type="button" onclick="loadJSON()">Load JSON response</button>
  >   </body>
  > </html>
  > ```
  >
  > Note: 
  >
  > Different browsers can have different syntax for its AJAX implementation.
  >
  > Using a library such as jQuery can help encapsulating those concepts.

